Section: A - Consultations and Visits
Pages: 16 to 28
Extracted text length: 31894 characters
============================================================

--- PAGE 16 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
The words, phrases, and abbreviations defined below are italicized throughout the General Preamble
for cross-reference. Unless otherwise specified, the following terms and expressions have the
following meanings:
A. Age Definitions
adolescent a person 16 or 17 years of age
adult a person 18 years of age and older
child a person 2 years to and including 15 years of age
infant a person from 29 days up to, and less than, 2 years of age
newborn a person from birth up to, and including, 28 days of age
B. Time Definitions
12 month any period of 12 consecutive months
period
calendar year the period from January 1 to December 31
day a calendar day
fiscal year from April 1 of one year to March 31 of the following year
month a calendar month
week any period of 7 consecutive days
C. Other Definitions
Act Health Insurance Act
Body Mass the ratio of the patient’s mass (measured in kilograms) to the square of the
Index (BMI) patient’s height (measured in metres)
Bariatric a facility that is approved and funded by the Ministry of Health for the
Regional assessment and treatment of morbid obesity for persons who have been
Assessment referred to the facility for that purpose.
and Treatment
Centre (RATC)
common the components that are included in all insured physician services
elements
constituent the common elements and, where applicable, the specific elements of an
elements insured service
CPSO College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario
Dental Surgeon a health care practitioner who meets the definition of “dental surgeon” as set
out in Regulation 552 under the Act, and who has been issued an OHIP
registration number.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP2 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 17 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
emergency an office or other place, including Urgent Care Centres, Walk-in Clinics,
department Extended Hours Clinics, or other settings (other than a hospital emergency
equivalent department) in which the only insured services provided are to patients who
do not have pre-arranged appointments
general all forms of anaesthesia except local infiltration
anaesthesia
“H” fee a fee set out in the Schedule for the technical component of a diagnostic
service provided either in a hospital or in an offsite premise operated by the
hospital corporation that has received approval under section 4 of the Public
Hospitals Act
holiday (for other than “H” prefix emergency department listings and Emergency
Department Equivalent - A888) means all of the following:
1. Family Day, Good Friday, Victoria Day, Canada Day, Civic Holiday, Labour Day,
Thanksgiving, New Year’s Day, and if the holiday falls on a Saturday or Sunday either
the Friday before or the Monday following the holiday, as determined at the choice of the
physician.
2. Boxing Day and if Boxing Day falls on a Saturday, the Monday following Boxing Day.
3. Christmas Day and
a. if Christmas Day falls on a Sunday, the Friday before Christmas Day;
or
b. if Christmas Day falls on a Saturday, the Friday before and the Monday following
Christmas Day.
holiday (for “H” prefix emergency department listings and Emergency Department
Equivalent - A888) means all of the following:
Family Day, Good Friday, Victoria Day, Canada Day, Civic Holiday, Labour Day,
Thanksgiving, New Year’s Day, December 25 through December 31 (inclusive) and,
a. if Christmas Day falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the Friday before Christmas Day;
and
b. if New Year’s Day falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the Monday following New Year’s
Day;
and
c. if Canada Day falls on a Saturday or Sunday either the Friday before or the Monday
following Canada Day, as determined at the choice of the physician.
[Commentary:
1.Only services rendered on a holiday as defined above and listed as a holiday premium or
service, e.g. certain special visit premiums, after-hours premiums and H-code emergency
department services, are eligible for payment as holiday claims.
2.Special visit premiums are not eligible for payment with A888.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP3 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 18 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
home patient’s place of residence including a multiple resident dwelling or single
location that shares a common external building entrance or lobby, such as
an apartment block, rest or retirement home, commercial hotel, motel or
boarding house, university or boarding school residence, hostel,
correctional facility, or group home and other than a hospital or Long-Term
Care institution
ICHSC Integrated Community Health Services Centre under the Integrated
Community Health Services Centres Act, 2023.
independent a procedural code with a “Z” prefix (which is payable in addition to the
operative amount payable for an assessment)
procedure
(IOP)
major the consultation or assessment where the decision to operate is made,
preoperative regardless of the time interval between the major preoperative visit and the
visit surgery
may include when “may” or “may include” are used in the description of a listed service,
all of the other services, or elements of, or components of insured services
that are referred to following the terms “may”, “may include”, and that are
performed in conjunction with the listed service are optional, but when
rendered are included in the amount payable for the listed service
medical a designated MOH physician
consultant
MOH Ministry of Health
most the attending physician who is primarily responsible for the day-to-day care
responsible of a hospital in-patient
physician
not eligible for when a service or a claim submitted for a service is described as “not
payment eligible for payment”, the service remains an insured service for which the
amount payable is zero
[Commentary:
Patients cannot be charged for services described as “not eligible for payment” as they remain
insured services.]
nurse has the same meaning as “registered nurse in the extended class” as set
practitioner out in Regulation 552 under the Act.
OHIP Ontario Health Insurance Plan
OMA Ontario Medical Association
only eligible for when a service is described as “only eligible for payment” when certain
payment conditions are met and those conditions are not met, the service becomes
not eligible for payment.
[Commentary:
Patients cannot be charged for services described as “only eligible for payment” as they remain
insured services.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP4 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 19 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
palliative care care provided to a terminally ill patient in the final year of life where the
decision has been made that there will be no aggressive treatment of the
underlying disease and care is to be directed to maintaining the comfort of
the patient until death occurs
patient’s the legal representative of a patient
representative
“P” fee the fee for the professional component of a diagnostic service
professional a class of service listed in the Schedule headed by a column listed “P” or
component with “professional component” listed opposite the service
[Commentary:
Additional information including the requirements for performing the professional component is
found in the individual preambles to the applicable sections of the Schedule.]
referral written request by a physician, nurse practitioner, or dental surgeon in
connection with an insured dental procedure rendered in a hospital for the
provision of expert services by another physician to the patient of the
referring physician, nurse practitioner, or dental surgeon.
rendered means that the service must be personally performed by the physician and
personally by may not be delegated to any other person. Services that are required to be
the physician “rendered personally by the physician” are uninsured if this requirement is
not met
Schedule Schedule of Benefits for Physician Services
specialist a physician who holds one of the following:
1. a certification issued by the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada
(RCPSC);
2. a certificate of registration issued by the CPSO to a physician who has successfully
completed the Assessment program for International Medical Graduates (APIMG) in a
recognized medical or surgical specialty;
3. a certificate of registration as a specialist issued by the CPSO to a physician employed;
– in a full-time teaching or full-time research appointment in a recognized medical
or surgical specialty other than family or general practice; and
– by the faculty of medicine of an Ontario university at the rank of assistant
professor or higher;
4. a certificate of registration issued on the order of the Registration Committee of the
CPSO to a physician who practices in a recognized medical or surgical specialty other
than family or general practice, where the requirements of registration are otherwise not
met, and to which certificate terms, conditions, or limitations may be attached; or
5. an equivalent certificate as described in 2, 3 or 4 above, issued by another Canadian
jurisdiction to a physician who is exempted from subsections 9 (1) and (3) of the
Medicine Act, 1991 by a regulation made under that Act.
specific specific components, in addition to the common elements, that are included
elements in particular insured physician services found in the General Preamble or
the specialty section of the Schedule
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP5 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 20 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
“T” fee the fee for the technical component of a service listed in the Pulmonary
Function Studies section of the Schedule
technical a class of service listed in the Schedule headed by a column listed “H” or “T”
component or with “technical component” listed opposite the service
[Commentary:
Additional information including the requirements for performing the technical component is
found in the individual preambles to the applicable sections of the schedule.]
transferal permanent or temporary complete transfer of the responsibility for the care
of the patient from one physician to another
[Commentary:
A transferal occurs, for example, where the first physician is leaving temporarily on holidays
and is unable to continue to treat the patient.]
uninsured a service that is not prescribed as “insured” under the Act
service
with or without when “with or without” are used in the description of a listed service, all of
the other services, or elements of, or components of insured services that
are referred to following the terms “with or without”, and that are performed
in conjunction with the listed service are optional, but when rendered are
insured and are included in the amount payable for the listed service
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP6 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 21 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
MAXIMUMS, MINIMUMS AND TIME OR UNIT-BASED SERVICES
In this Schedule when the amount payable for a service is described:
a. In terms of a maximum number of services without reference to a specific time period to
which the maximum applies, this means that the maximum refers to a maximum number of
services per patient per day. Those services rendered to the same patient on the same day
in excess of the maximum for that patient on that day are not eligible for payment.
b. In terms of a maximum number of services with reference to a specific time period to which
the maximum applies, the services are calculated per patient and the number of services is
based upon services rendered chronologically. Those services rendered to the same patient
during that specific time period in excess of the maximum for that patient are not eligible for
payment.
c. In terms of a maximum with reference to a specific part of the anatomy, this means a
maximum number of services per patient per day. Those services rendered in excess of the
maximum for that specific part of the anatomy per patient on that day are not eligible for
payment.
d. In terms of a minimum number of services without reference to a specific time period to
which the minimum applies, this means that the minimum refers to a minimum number of
services per patient per day. With the exception of those services listed in the “Diagnostic
Radiology” section of the Schedule or unless specifically stated otherwise, where less than
the number of services required to satisfy the minimum are rendered, the services are not
eligible for payment.
e. In terms of “repeat” or “repeats”, except with respect to repeat consultations or unless
otherwise stated, this means the same service(s) is rendered to the same patient by the
same physician on the same day.
f. In terms of a minimum required duration of time, the physician must record on the patient’s
permanent medical record or chart the time when the insured service started and ended. If
the patient’s permanent medical record or chart does not include this required information,
the service is not eligible for payment.
g. Based upon the number of “units” of service rendered, the physician must record on the
patient’s permanent medical record or chart the time when the insured service started and
ended. If the patient’s permanent medical record or chart does not include this required
information, the service is not eligible for payment.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP7 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 22 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
GENERAL INFORMATION
[Commentary: Services Insured by OHIP
The Schedule is established under section 37.1 of regulation 552 under the Act. The fees listed
are the amounts payable by OHIP for insured services. Insured services under the Act are
limited to those which are listed in this Schedule, medically necessary, are not otherwise
excluded by legislation or regulation, and are rendered personally by physicians or by others
delegated to perform them where such delegation is authorized in accordance with the
Schedule requirements for delegated services.
Some services are specifically listed as uninsured in regulation 552, section 24 of the Act (see
Appendix A), such as a service that is solely for the purpose of altering or restoring
appearance. Other services may be uninsured depending on the circumstances. An example
of a service which is uninsured in limited circumstances is psychotherapy, which is uninsured
where it is a requirement for the patient to obtain a diploma or degree or to fulfill a course of
study. Other examples of commonly uninsured services include missed appointments or
procedures, circumcision except if medically necessary, and certain services rendered and
documents and forms completed in connection with non-medically necessary requests (e.g. life
insurance application).]
[Commentary: Modifications to the Schedule
Under agreement between the MOH and the OMA, additions, deletions, fee changes, or other
modifications to the Schedule, are made by the MOH following consultation and/or negotiation
with the OMA. Physicians who wish to have modifications to the Schedule considered should
submit any proposals to the Physician Payment Committee (PPC) through the appropriate
clinical section of the OMA.
In the situation where a new therapy or procedure is being introduced into Ontario, and the
physicians performing the new therapy or procedure wish to have a new fee item inserted into
the Schedule, the following process is recommended.
An application for a new fee related to the new therapy or procedure should be submitted by
the appropriate section(s) of the OMA to the PPC for consideration, with documentation
supporting the introduction of this item into the Schedule. The PPC will advise OHIP whether or
not this new therapy is experimental. If the PPC and the MOH agree that the item is
experimental, the service is deemed uninsured (in accordance with section 24 of regulation
552 under the Act), and will not be introduced into the Schedule. If the MOH, on the advice of
the PPC, determines that the new therapy or procedure is not experimental, the fee application
will be handled in the usual manner as detailed above.]
[Commentary: Medical Research
Examinations or procedures for the purpose of a research or survey program are not insured
services, nor are services provided by a laboratory or a hospital that support an examination or
procedure that is for the purpose of research or a survey. The exception to this is that an
assessment conducted to determine if an insured person is suitable for such a program is not
necessarily an uninsured service (see section 24 of regulation 552 under the Act - this is
provided as Appendix A of the Schedule).]
[Commentary: Medical Records
All insured services must be documented in appropriate records. The Act requires that the
record establish that:
1.an insured service was provided;
2.the service for which the account is submitted is the service that was rendered; and
3.the service was medically necessary.
The medical record requirements as found in the Act are listed in Appendix G of the Schedule.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP8 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 23 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
GENERAL INFORMATION
GENERAL PAYMENT RULES
[Commentary:
Claims for payment must be submitted to OHIP in the form and by the medium (e.g. electronic
data transmission; machine readable input) as set out in sections 38.3 to 38.5 of regulation 552
under the Act and must contain the information required by the regulation and the General
Manager of OHIP. Regulation 552 under the Act can be found at:
http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/DBLaws/Regs/English/900552_e.htm.
Claims must be submitted within three months of the date the service was rendered, except in
extenuating circumstances. A claim cannot be accepted for payment unless it meets all of the
technical and formal requirements set out in the Act and regulations.]
1. The fee is payable only to the physician who rendered the service personally, or by the
physician whose delegate rendered the service where delegation is authorized in accordance
with the Schedule.
2. Where more than one physician renders different components of a listed service, only one fee is
payable for that service, and the fee is payable only where the Schedule provides that different
physicians may perform different components of the service.
[Commentary:
Where an insured service contains several components (e.g. surgical procedures that include
post-operative care or fracture care), the components of the service are not divisible among
physicians for claims purposes and the physicians are responsible for apportioning payment
amongst themselves.]
3. Where the Schedule provides that different physicians may substitute for one another in
performing the total service, only one fee is payable for the service.
[Commentary:
When physicians routinely or frequently substitute for each other in providing hospital visits to
registered bed patients in active treatment hospitals, e.g. weekend coverage or daily rounds by
various members of a group, the most responsible physician may claim for all the visits.]
Specialist services
When a service rendered by a specialist comprises part of an insured consultation or assessment that
falls within the scope of his or her specialist practice, the service is not eligible for payment unless the
claim for the service is submitted either:
a. unless otherwise noted, in respect of a service described in the portions of the Consultations
and Visits section of this Schedule that reflects the physician’s Royal College of Physicians
and Surgeons of Canada specialty, as documented in the records maintained by the MOH
for claims payment purposes; or
b. in respect of a service described in this Schedule under the following sub-headings which
can be claimed by any specialty: psychotherapy, counselling, HIV primary care, palliative
care support, hypnotherapy, certification of mental illness, interviews, genetic assessments,
midwife or aboriginal midwife-requested emergency and special emergency assessments,
home care application, or home care supervision.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP9 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 24 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
GENERAL INFORMATION
When a service rendered by a specialist does not fall within the scope of the specialist’s practice and/
or the specialist is providing primary care in a family or general practice setting, the service is only
eligible for payment when the claim is submitted using the appropriate code from the “Family Practice
& Practice in General” listings.
When more than one assessment is rendered to a patient during the same visit by the same physician
who is qualified in one or more specialties, only one assessment is payable.
[Commentary:
Any additional assessment is not eligible for payment.]
Use of Codes, Prefixes and Suffixes
[Commentary:
Services are generally, but not necessarily, listed by anatomical system or specialty for
convenience.]
The alpha-numeric fee code opposite the service listing in this Schedule must be set out in the claim
submitted, together with the required suffix.
Surgical Codes: In the surgical part of the Schedule, the required suffixes are:
suffix A if the physician performs the procedure;
suffix B if the physician assisted at the surgery; and
suffix C if the physician administered the anaesthetic.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP10 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 25 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
2.Diagnostic Radiology;
GENERAL INFORMATION
GENERAL PAYMENT RULES
Diagnostic Services Rendered at a Hospital
The technical component of those diagnostic services that are listed with "technical component" or in
a column headed "H" or "T" is not eligible for payment if the service is rendered to a patient who:
1. is an in-patient of a hospital; or
2. attends a hospital where he or she receives an insured diagnostic service; and
3. within 24 hours of receiving that diagnostic service, is admitted to the same hospital as an in-
patient in connection with the same condition, illness, injury or disease in relation to which the
diagnostic service was rendered.
[Commentary:
1.For those diagnostic services which have both technical and professional components listed
under one fee schedule code, the technical and professional components are claimed
separately. The claim for the technical component is submitted using the fee schedule code
with the suffix B and the claim for the professional component is submitted using the fee
schedule code with a suffix C.
2.The technical component may be listed as either "technical component" or in a column
headed "H" or "T". The professional component may be listed as either "professional
component" or in a column headed "P".]
The technical component of a diagnostic service listed in the column headed with an "H" and rendered
outside of a hospital is not eligible for payment under the Health Insurance Act.
Payment for Diagnostic and Therapeutic Services Rendered at a Hospital
The technical component of a diagnostic and therapeutic service listed below and rendered in a
hospital is payable at 94.68% of the listed fee in the column headed “T”.
G104A, G111A, G121A, G127A, G140A, G143A, G146A, G149A, G152A, G153A, G167A,
G174A,G181A, G209A, G284A, G308A, G310A, G311A, G315A, G414A, G440A, G441A, G442A,
G443A,G448A, G451A, G455A, G466A, G471A, G519A, G540A, G541A, G542A, G544A, G554A,
G570A,G574A, G582A, G585A, G647A, G648A, G651A, G652A, G654A, G655A, G682A, G683A,
G684A,G685A, G686A, G687A, G688A, G689A, G694A, G695A, G815A, G850A, G851A, G852A,
G853A,G854A, G855A, G856A, G857A, G858A, J301B, J304B, J324B, J327B
Technical Component Requirements
The technical component of a diagnostic procedure as described in the relevant section of the
Schedule is only eligible for payment where:
1. the physician has the necessary training and experience to personally render the technical
component of the service; and
2. the physician maintains documentation that describes the process by which the physician
monitors quality assurance in accordance with professional standards.
[Commentary:
1.The physician submitting a claim for the technical component is responsible for the complete
quality assurance process for all elements of the technical component of the service,
including data acquisition, reporting, and record keeping. The physician must be able to
demonstrate the above upon request by the MOH.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP11 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 26 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
GENERAL INFORMATION
2.For delegated services rendered in the physician’s office, see the Delegated Procedures
section in the General Preamble of this Schedule.]
Consultation and Assessment Codes
There are four different prefixes used for consultations and assessments listed in the “Consultations
and Visits” section of the Schedule. The codes with the “A” prefix are described as the “General
Listings”. These must be used when submitting a claim for consultations and assessments except in
the following situations when the code listed below must be used:
1. acute care hospital – non-emergency in-patient services – “C” prefix codes;
2. long term care institution – non-emergency in-patient services – “W” prefix codes;
3. emergency department – services rendered by a physician on duty – “H” prefix (H1- codes); or
4. rehabilitation unit – services rendered by a specialist in Physical Medicine – “H” prefix codes
(H3XX codes)
[Commentary:
Submit claim using an “A” prefix assessment when an assessment is rendered in conjunction
with a special visit premium. Information regarding when special visit premiums are payable is
found on pages GP65 to GP78 of the General Preamble.]
Independent Consideration (IC)
Services listed in the Schedule without specified fees are identified as “IC” and are given independent
consideration by the medical consultant. Claims for such services must be submitted with a
supporting letter explaining the amount of the fee claimed, and must include an appropriate operative
or consultation report, and a comparison of the scope and difficulty of the procedure in relation to non-
IC procedures in the Schedule. For treatment of tumours not listed in the Schedule, surgeons must
use the IC code, R993, and for surgical procedures not listed, but similar to a listed service, the code,
R990.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP12 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 27 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSTITUENT AND COMMON ELEMENTS OF INSURED SERVICES
[Commentary:
This Schedule identifies the constituent elements that comprise insured services. Common
elements apply to all insured services and specific elements apply to specific groups of
services where identified either in the General Preamble or in the preamble to a specific
system and/or specialty sections of the Schedule. There may be additional specific
requirements (“required elements of service”, “payment rules”, “claims submission instructions”
or “notes”) for some individual services, and these are noted with the description of any such
service within the Schedule. In order to determine the correct claim to use for a service
rendered, the necessary information is found by reviewing the common elements, specific
elements, and service specific information.
No charges may be made (except to OHIP) for an insured service rendered to an insured
person or for any of the constituent elements of such insured services. This is prohibited by the
Act and/or the Commitment to the Future of Medicare Act, 2004.
Most services include as a constituent element of the service the provision of the premises,
equipment, supplies, and personnel used in the performance of the common and specific
elements of the service. This is not, however, the case for services denoted by codes marked
with the prefix “#”, and for services that are divided into professional and technical components
where only the professional component is an insured service under the Act.
For those codes denoted with the prefix “#” and performed in a hospital, the premises,
equipment, supplies, and personnel used to perform all elements of the service are funded by
the hospital global budget.
For those services denoted with the prefix “#” and provided in an Integrated Community Health
Services Centre (ICHSC), the premises, equipment, supplies, and personnel are funded under
the facility costs set out in the Integrated Community Health Services Centres Act, 2023.
Patients cannot be charged for the premises, equipment, supplies and personnel for services
denoted with the prefix “#” rendered outside of a hospital or ICHSC if the premises, equipment,
supplies and personnel support, assist or provide a necessary adjunct to an insured service
denoted with the prefix “#” as charging a patient would be contrary to the Integrated
Community Health Services Centres Act, 2023.]
COMMON ELEMENTS OF INSURED SERVICES
All insured services include the skill, time, and responsibility involved in performing, including when
delegated to a non-physician in accordance with the Delegated Procedures Section (GP62) of the
General Preamble, supervising the performance of the constituent elements of the service.
Unless otherwise specifically listed in the Schedule, the following elements are common to all insured
services.
A. Being available to provide follow-up insured services to the patient and arranging for coverage
when not available.
B. Making arrangements for appointment(s) for the insured service.
C. Travelling to and from the place(s) where any element(s) of the service is (are) performed.
[Commentary:
Travelling to visit an insured person outside of the usual geographical area of practice of the
person making the visit is an uninsured service – see Regulation 552 section 24(1) paragraph
1 under the Act.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP13 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 28 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSTITUENT AND COMMON ELEMENTS OF INSURED SERVICES
D. Obtaining and reviewing information (including history taking) from any appropriate source(s) so as
to arrive at any decision(s) made in order to perform the elements of the service.
Appropriate sources include but are not limited to:
1. patient and patient’s representative
2. patient charts and records
3. investigational data
4. physicians, pharmacists, and other health professionals
5. suppliers and manufacturers of drugs and devices
6. relevant literature and research data.
E. Obtaining consents or delivering written consents, unless otherwise specifically listed in the
Schedule.
F. Keeping and maintaining appropriate medical records.
G. Providing any medical prescriptions except where the request for this service is initiated by the
patient or patient’s representative and no related insured service is provided.
H. Preparing or submitting documents or records, or providing information for use in programs
administered by the MOH.
I. Conferring with or providing advice, direction, information, or records to physicians and other
professionals associated with the health and development of the patient.
J. Such planning, preparation, and administration for the performance of the elements of the service
directly attributable either to a specific patient or to a physician maintaining his/her practice, unless
otherwise specifically listed in the Schedule.
K. Except for services denoted by codes marked with the prefix “#”, or for services that are divided into
professional and technical components where only the professional component is an insured
service under the Act, providing premises, equipment, supplies, and personnel for the common
elements of the service.
L. Waiting times associated with the provision of the service(s).
While no occasion may arise for performing elements A, B, C, D, F, G, H or K when performed in
connection with the specific elements of a service, these are included in the service.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP14 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)