Subsection: Virtual Care Services
Parent Section: A
Page Reference: A62
Pages: 190 to 199
Text chunks: 1
Total text length: 23764 characters
Table indicators: {
  "multi_column": false,
  "has_h_p_columns": false,
  "has_asst_surg_anae": false,
  "has_time_requirements": false,
  "has_fee_amounts": true,
  "table_sections": []
}
============================================================

--- PAGE 190 ---
CONSULTATIONS AND VISITS
VIRTUAL CARE SERVICES
DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this section of the Schedule only, the following Definitions apply:
Comprehensive Virtual Care Service means a Virtual Care Service rendered where an
Existing/Ongoing Patient-Physician Relationship exists, and in the physicians’ professional
opinion in accordance with accepted professional standards and practice, the person's care
and support requirements can be effectively and appropriately delivered by Video or
Telephone.
Existing/Ongoing Patient-Physician Relationship means:
1. Where a physician is providing a Virtual Care Service to a patient where there has been at least
one insured service with a direct physical encounter between the patient and that physician
(Family and General Practice Physician or specialist) in the preceding 24-months; or
2. Where a physician is providing a Virtual Care Service to a patient who has signed the MOH’s
Patient Enrollment and Consent to Release Personal Health Information form and is enrolled to
that physician or another physician within the same group (who is signatory/locum to a MOH
alternate funding plan agreement); or
3. Where a specialist or GP Focused Practice Physician is providing a consultation by Video set
out in Appendix J – Section 1, or has provided any such consultation in the preceding 24-
months to that patient; or
[Commentary:
Where the visit leading to the referral for consultation has occurred virtually, it would be
expected that the referring physician has an established relationship with the patient and that
the clinical issue leading to the referral has been assessed in-person within the previous 12-
months.]
[Commentary:
A consultation billed as an insured service under K083 or as an uninsured service funded
under the Ontario Virtual Care Program and rendered prior to December 1, 2022, is considered
evidence of an Existing/Ongoing Patient-Physician Relationship.]
[Commentary:
Where a physician who has been paid for a consultation for the patient for the same diagnosis
makes a request for a referral for ongoing management of the patient, the service rendered
following the referral is not payable as a consultation, unless the request for referral, if the
referral is made, allows for an ongoing patient physician relationship in the context of a
consultation by Video.]
4. Where a physician provides any of the following services, or has provided any of the following
services in the preceding 24-months:
• A920 – Medical management of early pregnancy - initial service by Video or
Telephone,
• A945/C945 – Special palliative care consultation by Video,
• A680/C680 – Initial assessment - substance abuse by Video,
• A814, A817, A818 – Midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-Requested Assessments
(MRAs) by Video,
• A802 – Extended midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-requested genetic assessment by
Video,
Amd 12 Draft 1 A62 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 191 ---
CONSULTATIONS AND VISITS
VIRTUAL CARE SERVICES
• A801 – Comprehensive midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-requested genetic
assessment by Video,
• A800 – Midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-requested genetic assessment by Video,
• A253 – Optometrist-Requested Assessment (ORA) by Video,
• A256 – Special optometrist-requested assessment by Video,
• A957 – Addiction medicine FPA by Video,
• K680 – Substance abuse – extended assessment by Video.
[Commentary:
1.Follow-up Virtual Care Services provided in the 24-months subsequent to the services listed
in 3 or 4 may be claimed as Comprehensive Virtual Care Services.
2.A special palliative care consultation billed as an insured service under K092/K093 and
rendered prior to December 1, 2022, is considered evidence of an Existing/Ongoing Patient-
Physician Relationship.]
GP Focused Practice Physician means, for the purpose of eligibility to provide a focused
practice consultation by Video (A010, A011, A906, A913, A914), a physician who has been
designated by the bi-lateral MOH-OMA GP Focused Practice Review Committee or a physician
who is eligible for the focused practice psychotherapy premium.
Limited Virtual Care Service means a Virtual Care Service rendered where an Existing/
Ongoing Patient-Physician Relationship does not exist, and in the physicians’ professional
opinion in accordance with accepted professional standards and practice, the person's care
and support requirements can be effectively and appropriately delivered by Video or
Telephone.
Verified-Virtual Visit Solution means virtual service delivery platforms listed on Ontario
Health’s public list of verified solutions.
Virtual Care Service means a service provided using information technologies to render
eligible services to patients remotely.
Eligible Virtual Care Service modalities are:
Telephone means synchronous audio-only communication (no visualization); and
Video means 2-way synchronous video-conference (audio and Video visualization) using a
Verified-Virtual Visit Solution;
Terms and Conditions for Virtual Care Services
1. Other than a direct physical encounter, all other requirements and conditions for the appropriate
service as described in the Schedule must be met.
2. Virtual Care Services are not eligible for payment where it is not medically appropriate to
provide the specific service without a direct physical encounter.
a. If during the course of a Virtual Care Service it becomes apparent that the service cannot be
appropriately completed without a direct physical encounter, the Virtual Care Service is not
eligible for payment (only the service with a direct physical encounter is eligible for
payment).
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) A63 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 192 ---
CONSULTATIONS AND VISITS
VIRTUAL CARE SERVICES
b. Where a patient requests a virtual visit (is not willing to present in-person, despite the
physician’s advice and availability), physicians may submit a claim for the appropriate fee
code for the service that was rendered virtually.
3. Video services are only eligible for payment when performed using a Verified Virtual Visit
Solution.
[Commentary:
Ontario Health’s public list of verified solutions is available at: https://www.ontariohealth.ca/our-
work/digital-standards/virtual-visits-verification-standard/vendor-list.]
4. All other insured services that are rendered by Video or Telephone to insured persons and that
are not Comprehensive Virtual Care Services, Limited Virtual Care Services, or specifically
listed as insured services or are a component of an insured service are not eligible for payment.
5. Virtual Care Services are not eligible for payment unless the delivery modality is documented on
the patient's medical record.
6. Virtual Care Services are not eligible for payment unless initiated by the patient or the patient’s
representative, or the service represents a medically necessary follow-up visit to a preceding
visit initiated by the patient or the patient’s representative.
[Commentary:
As per GP15, following an insured service, discussion with, and providing advice and
information, including prescribing therapy to the patient or the patient’s representative, whether
by Telephone or otherwise, on matters related to the service is a specific element of the
preceding service and should not be separately claimed. This includes reporting results of
related procedures and/or assessments (when professionally appropriate to report without
additional patient assessment) and monitoring the patient’s condition remotely until the next
medically necessary assessment.
For clarity, administrative staff may co-ordinate appointments and organize care in a manner
analogous to in-person encounters without violating this condition. Similarly, medically
necessary follow-up services may be organized by the provider (or by their staff) without
violating the condition. However, a physician-initiated call to “check-in” on a patient would not
be eligible for payment, nor would any telephone calls or Video encounters conducted for
administrative purposes (such as to inform patients of clinic closures or the availability of
remote services).
Furthermore, services are not eligible for payment when initiated by the physician (or the
physician’s staff) without a clear and medically necessary reason for doing so. For example,
the communication of normal lab work, unless medically necessary (in so far as the clinical
management of the patient is altered) should not be billed.
Physician-initiated communication to provide advice or guidance regarding a previously
rendered service is also not separately eligible/ billable. A common example of this would occur
when a patient is provided with a prescription along with instruction to fill it only upon receipt of
a positive test result. The call to inform the patient of the test result is not eligible for payment
as it would be considered a Specific Element of the initial (refer to: item F, GP15, Schedule of
Benefits).
Amd 12 Draft 1 A64 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 193 ---
CONSULTATIONS AND VISITS
VIRTUAL CARE SERVICES
As a general rule, the provider should consider whether the remote encounter would have
occurred in their “in-person” practice. In circumstances where an in-person encounter would
not have taken place, it is unlikely that a claim for a virtual service could be supported.
Consultations, which arise from requests from other providers, would not violate the condition
in so far as the patient would have assented to the referral as part of their discussion with the
referring provider.]
7. Virtual Care Services are not eligible for payment unless personally performed by the physician
or rendered in accordance with the payment rules regarding supervision of a Medical Trainee.
8. Virtual Care Services are not eligible for payment for services provided to hospital inpatients or
patients in a Long-Term Care institution unless all of the following requirements have been met:
• The physician providing the service is not the patient's MRP.
• The hospital/Long-Term Care institution does not have a physician on staff and
present in the community with the expertise to render the necessary service, as
documented by the referring physician in the patient’s medical record.
• An assessment with a direct physical encounter by the referring physician must
have been completed within 30 days preceding a virtual in-patient specialist
consultation to confirm the need for a consultation.
9. Services involving a direct physical encounter must be made available by the physician
providing Comprehensive Virtual Care Services, or by the physician’s group, within a clinically
appropriate time-frame, if it becomes apparent during a Virtual Care Service that a service
involving a direct physical encounter is medically necessary, or if at the time of scheduling the
service the patient expresses preference for a service involving a direct physical encounter.
[Commentary:
For the purpose of this provision, with respect to specialist and GP Focused Practice
Physicians, a group is defined as: those physicians in the same hospital specialty call rotation,
or who are co-located in shared clinical physical space, and have shared access to the
patient’s medical record. For family and general practice physicians, a group is defined as:
Patient Enrollment Model physicians who are signatory or contracted to the same specific
group contract (i.e., as identified by the same group billing number), or those physicians who
are co-located in a shared clinical physical space and have shared access to the patient’s
medical record].
10.If during the course of a Virtual Care Service the modality changes (for example, a Telephone
service transitions into a Video service), only the service performed by the modality that
represents the greater part (more than 50%) of the time spent providing the Virtual Care Service
is payable. For time-based services, the combined time of both modalities will be used to
calculate the number of time units eligible for payment.
11. For time-based services, only time spent in direct communication with the patient or the
patient’s representative in the provision of the insured service will be used to calculate the
number of time units eligible for payment.
[Commentary:
Both the patient and physician must be located in Ontario for the services to be insured and
payable under OHIP (see section 37.1 of Regulation 552 under the HIA).]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) A65 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 194 ---
CONSULTATIONS AND VISITS
VIRTUAL CARE SERVICES
Claims submission instructions:
Comprehensive Virtual Care Services rendered within an Existing/Ongoing Patient-Physician
Relationship must be claimed using the fee codes listed in Appendix J – Section 1.
Claims submitted for Comprehensive Virtual Care Services must include the modality indicator
that identifies the technology used to deliver the service:
K300A – identifies Video technology used during the service
K301A – identifies Telephone technology (audio only) used during the service
Submit claims for Comprehensive Virtual Care Services using the in-person fee value
regardless of whether the service is rendered by Video or Telephone. Payments for Telephone
services will be automatically reduced as set out below.
Limited Virtual Care Services rendered outside of an Existing/Ongoing Patient-Physician
Relationship must be claimed using the fee codes listed in Appendix J – Section 2.
Payment rules:
Comprehensive Virtual Care Services rendered by Video are payable at fees that are
equivalent to the corresponding in-person fees for those services; or for Limited Virtual Care
Services, the fees listed in Appendix J – Section 2 that correspond to those services.
The amount payable for Comprehensive Virtual Care Services rendered by Telephone is 85%
of the corresponding in-person fee except for K007, K005, K197 and K198 which will be
payable at 95% of the corresponding in-person fee.
Comprehensive Virtual Care Services – Virtual Only Fee Codes
Midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-Requested Assessment (MAMRA) by Video
Midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-Requested Assessment (MAMRA) by Video is an assessment of
a mother or newborn provided by a physician upon the written request of a midwife or
Aboriginal Midwife because of the complex, obscure or serious nature of the patient’s problem
and is payable to a family physician or obstetrician for such an assessment in any setting.
Urgent or emergency requests may be initiated verbally but must subsequently be requested in
writing. The written request must be retained on the patient’s permanent medical record. The
MRA must include the common and specific elements of a specific assessment by Video and
the physician must submit his/her findings, opinions and recommendations verbally to the
midwife or Aboriginal Midwife, and in writing to both the midwife or Aboriginal Midwife and the
patient’s primary care physician, if applicable. Maximum one MAMRA (A814 or A813) per
patient per physician per pregnancy.
A814 Midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-Requested Assessment
(MAMRA) by Video............................................................. 111.70
Amd 12 Draft 1 A66 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 195 ---
CONSULTATIONS AND VISITS
VIRTUAL CARE SERVICES
Midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-Requested Special Assessment (MAMRSA) by Video
Midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-Requested Special Assessment (MAMRSA) by Video must
include constituent elements of A814 and is payable in any setting:
a. to a paediatrician for an urgent or emergency assessment of a newborn; or
b. to a family physician or obstetrician for assessment of a mother or newborn when, because
of the very complex, obscure or serious nature of the problem, the physician must spend at
least 50 minutes in direct patient contact, exclusive of tests. The start and stop times of the
assessment must be recorded on the patient’s permanent medical record. In the absence of
such information, the service is payable as A814. Maximum one MAMRSA (A817 or A815)
per patient per physician per pregnancy.
A817 Midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-Requested Special Assessment
(MAMRSA) by Video .......................................................... 186.95
Midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-Requested Anaesthesia Assessment (MAMRAA) by Video
Midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-Requested Anaesthesia Assessment (MAMRAA) by Video is an
assessment of a mother or newborn provided by an anaesthesiologist upon the written request
of a midwife or Aboriginal Midwife because of the complex, obscure or serious nature of the
patient’s problem and is payable to an anaesthesiologist for such an assessment in any setting.
Urgent or emergency requests may be initiated verbally but must subsequently be requested in
writing. The written request must be retained on the patient’s permanent medical record. The
MRAA must include the common and specific elements of a specific assessment by Video and
the physician must submit his/her findings, opinions and recommendations verbally to the
midwife or Aboriginal Midwife and in writing to both the midwife or Aboriginal Midwife and the
patient’s primary care physician, if applicable. Maximum one MAMRAA (A818 or A816) per
patient per anaesthesiologist per pregnancy.
A818 Midwife or Aboriginal Midwife-Requested Anaesthesia
Assessment (MAMRAA) by Video...................................... 106.80
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) A67 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 196 ---
CONSULTATIONS AND VISITS
VIRTUAL CARE SERVICES
GENERAL LISTINGS
Focused practice consultation by Video
Focused practice consultation by Video is a consultation rendered by a GP Focused Practice
Physician who completes a full, relevant history of the presenting complaint and detailed
examination of the affected part(s), region(s), or system(s) needed to make a diagnosis, and/or
exclude disease, and/or assess function.
A010 GP focused practice consultation by Video ............................ 87.90
Focused practice repeat consultation by Video
Focused practice repeat consultation by Video is a repeat consultation rendered by a GP
Focused Practice Physician who completes a full, relevant history of the presenting complaint
and detailed examination of the affected part(s), region(s), or system(s) needed to make a
diagnosis, and/or exclude disease, and/or assess function.
A011 GP focused practice repeat consultation by Video ................. 45.90
Focused practice limited consultation by Video
Focused practice limited consultation by Video is a limited consultation rendered by a GP
Focused Practice Physician who completes a full, relevant history of the presenting complaint
and detailed examination of the affected part(s), region(s), or system(s) needed to make a
diagnosis, and/or exclude disease, and/or assess function.
A906 GP focused practice limited consultation by Video................. 73.25
Focused practice special consultation by Video
Focused practice special consultation by Video is a consultation rendered by a GP Focused
Practice Physician who completes a full, relevant history of the presenting complaint and
detailed examination of the affected part(s), region(s), or system(s) needed to make a
diagnosis, and/or exclude disease, and/or assess function and who spends a minimum of 50
minutes of direct contact with the patient, exclusive of time spent rendering any other
separately billable intervention to the patient.
A913 GP focused practice special consultation by Video ................ 150.70
Focused practice comprehensive consultation by Video
Focused practice comprehensive consultation by Video is a consultation rendered by a GP
Focused Practice Physician who completes a full, relevant history of the presenting complaint
and detailed examination of the affected part(s), region(s), or system(s) needed to make a
diagnosis, and/or exclude disease, and/or assess function and who spends a minimum of 75
minutes of direct contact with the patient, exclusive of time spent rendering any other
separately billable intervention to the patient.
A914 GP focused practice comprehensive consultation by Video... 226.05
[Commentary:
Required elements of consultations are set out under the heading Consultations in the General
Preamble.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 A68 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 197 ---
CONSULTATIONS AND VISITS
VIRTUAL CARE SERVICES
Limited Virtual Care Services
Definitions/Required Elements of Service
A Limited Virtual Care Service is an assessment which includes at a minimum, history-taking
and medically appropriate exam to arrive at a diagnosis and provide an appropriate
management plan and/or management, and when provided, the other specific elements of
assessments.
A101 Limited Virtual Care by Video ................................................. 20.00
A102 Limited Virtual Care by Telephone.......................................... 15.00
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) A69 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 198 ---
CONSULTATIONS AND VISITS
VIRTUAL CARE SERVICES
VIRTUAL CARE SERVICES – PREMIUMS AND MANAGEMENT FEES
Premiums
The applicable premium(s) listed in the Premiums Table below are payable to physicians when
providing eligible Comprehensive Virtual Care Services:
Applicable
Descriptor Premium Payable
Premium
E060 Post renal transplant assessment 25% of fee for virtual service
premium
E078 Chronic Disease Assessment 50% of fee for virtual service
Premium
E080 (video First visit by primary care physician $25.25
only) after hospital discharge
E088 Congestive heart failure premium 50% of fee for virtual service
E098 Gastroenterology chronic disease 28% of fee for virtual service
assessment premium
K187 Acute post-discharge community 15% of fee for virtual service
psychiatric care
K188 High-risk community psychiatric 15% of fee for virtual service
care
K189 (video Urgent community psychiatric $216.30
only) follow-up
E079 Smoking cessation: Initial discussion $13.20 for phone and $15.55 for
with patient, to eligible services video
Age-Based Fee - 10-30% of fee for virtual service
Premiums
Focused - 17% of fee for virtual service
Practice
Psychotherapy
Premium
Internal - 12% of fee for virtual service
Medicine Office
Assessment
Premium
FHG In-Basket - 10% of fee for virtual service
Premium
Amd 12 Draft 1 A70 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 199 ---
CONSULTATIONS AND VISITS
VIRTUAL CARE SERVICES
Management Fees
Comprehensive Virtual Care Services are included as a consultation or assessment for the
purposes of meeting the requirements for payment of the applicable management fee(s) listed
in the Management Fees for Services by Telephone or Video Table below.
[Commentary:
All requirements and conditions for the appropriate management fee as described in the
Schedule must be met.]
Fee Code Descriptor
K045 Endocrinology & Metab/Internal Med-Diabetes
management by a specialist-annual
K046 Endocrinology & Metab/Internal Med-Diabetes
team management-annual
Q040 GP/FP-Diabetes management incentive-
annual
K119 Paediatrics-Paediatric developmental
assessment incentive-annual
K481 Rheumatology-Rheumatoid arthritis
management by a specialist-annual
K682 Opioid Agonist Maintenance Program monthly
management fee-intensive, per month
K683 Opioid Agonist Maintenance Program monthly
management fee-maintenance, per month
K684 Opioid Agonist Maintenance Program-team
premium, per month, to K682 or K683 add
K030* Diabetic management assessment
Payment rules:
* A virtual K030 is only eligible for payment if a K030 involving a direct physical encounter has
been performed in the preceding 12 months.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) A71 Amd 12 Draft 1