Subsection: Consultations
Parent Section: GP
Page Reference: GP16
Pages: 30 to 34
Text chunks: 1
Total text length: 9274 characters
Table indicators: {
  "multi_column": false,
  "has_h_p_columns": false,
  "has_asst_surg_anae": false,
  "has_time_requirements": false,
  "has_fee_amounts": false,
  "table_sections": []
}
============================================================

--- PAGE 30 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
CONSULTATIONS
CONSULTATION
Definition/Required elements of service:
A consultation is an assessment rendered following a written request from a referring:
1. physician
2. nurse practitioner or
3. dental surgeon in connection with an insured dental procedure rendered in a hospital,
who, in light of his/her professional knowledge of the patient, requests the opinion of a physician (the
“consultant physician”) competent to give advice in this field because of the complexity, seriousness,
or obscurity of the case, or because another opinion is requested by the patient or patient’s
representative.
[Commentary:
1.The referring physician, nurse practitioner or dental surgeon must determine if multiple
requests by a patient or the patient’s representative to different physicians in the same
specialty for the same condition are medically necessary. Services that are not medically
necessary are uninsured.
2.If the physician rendering the service requests a referring physician, nurse practitioner or
dental surgeon to submit a consultation request for that service after the service has been
provided, a consultation is not payable. The visit fee appropriate to the service rendered may
be claimed.
3. Where a physician who has been paid for a consultation for the patient for the same
diagnosis makes a request for a referral for ongoing management of the patient, the service
rendered following the referral is not payable as a consultation, except as outlined in the
Virtual Care Services section under definitions, part 3, commentary 3]
A consultation includes the services necessary to enable the consultant to prepare a written report
(including findings, opinions, and recommendations) to the referring physician, nurse practitioner or
dental surgeon. Where the referral is made by a nurse practitioner, the consultant shall provide the
report to the nurse practitioner and the patient’s primary care provider, if applicable. Except where
otherwise specified, the consultant is required to perform a general, specific or medical specific
assessment, including a review of all relevant data.
The following are additional requirements for a consultation:
a. A copy of the written request for the consultation, signed by the referring physician, nurse
practitioner or dental surgeon must be kept in the consulting physician’s medical record,
except in the case of a consultation which occurs in a hospital, long-term care institution or
multi-specialty clinic where common medical records are maintained. In such cases, the
written request may be contained on the common medical record.
b. The request identifies the consultant by name, the referring physician, nurse practitioner or
dental surgeon by name and billing number, and identifies the patient by name and health
number.
c. The written request sets out the information relevant to the referral and specifies the
service(s) required.
In the event these requirements are not met, the amount payable for a consultation will be reduced to
a lesser assessment fee.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP16 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 31 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSULTATIONS
[Commentary:
The request would ordinarily also include appropriate clinical information, such as the reason
for the referral for consultation, present and past history, physical findings and relevant test
results and reports.]
Payment rules:
1. Consultations rendered to the same patient by the same physician for the same diagnosis are
limited to one service per two consecutive 12 month periods except:
a. When the additional consultation service(s) is a repeat consultation;
b. When a consultant has rendered a consultation service to a patient in any location and the
same consultant is referred to the same patient a second time with the same diagnosis, then
the number of consultations eligible for payment is a total of two services per two
consecutive 12 month periods only when:
i. the second consultation is rendered for a hospital inpatient or a patient in an Emergency
Department; and
ii. the consultation is rendered more than 12 months but less than 24 months following the
first consultation.
See the Table below.
Limits on Consultation Services Rendered for the Same
Problem Within Two Consecutive 12 Month Periods
Total consultation
services eligible for
Patient location where
payment in two
consultation rendered
consecutive 12 month
periods
Services
Services
rendered
Second rendered
First consultation between 12
consultation within first
and 24
12 months
months
All locations Hospital One service One service
Inpatient or
Emergency
Department
All locations All locations One service
except
hospital
inpatient or
Emergency
Department
2. Consultations rendered to the same patient by the same consultant with a clearly defined
unrelated diagnosis are limited to one service every 12 months.
3. The amount payable for consultations will be adjusted to the amount payable for a general or
specific assessment, depending upon the specialty of the consultant where:
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP17 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 32 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSULTATIONS
a. consultations are in excess of the above limits;
b. the payment requirements of a repeat consultation are not met; or
c. the consultation is requested by a Medical Trainee.
Note:
1.The above limits are applicable to all consultations, including time-based and age-specific
consultation services (e.g. special, extended and comprehensive consultations) but not
repeat consultations.
2.In the preoperative preparation of a patient undergoing the following low risk elective surgical
procedures under local anaesthesia and/or I.V. sedation, a preoperative consultation by any
physician is only eligible for payment where the medical record demonstrates the
consultation is medically necessary.
a.cataract surgery;
b.colonoscopy;
c.cystoscopy;
d.carpal tunnel surgery; or
e.arthroscopic surgery.
[Commentary:
Such medically necessary consultations would be very uncommon.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP18 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 33 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
CONSULTATIONS
REPEAT CONSULTATION
Definition/Required elements of service:
A repeat consultation is an additional consultation rendered by the same consultant, in respect of the
same presenting problem, following care rendered to the patient by another physician in the interval
following the initial consultation but preceding the repeat consultation.
A repeat consultation has the same requirements as a consultation including the requirement for a
new written request by the referring physician, nurse practitioner or dental surgeon.
LIMITED CONSULTATION
Definition/Required elements of service:
A limited consultation is a consultation which is less demanding and, in terms of time, normally
requires substantially less of the physician’s time than the full consultation. Otherwise, a limited
consultation has the same requirements as a full consultation.
Under the heading of “Family Practice & Practice in General", a limited consultation is the service
rendered by any physician who is not a specialist, where the service meets all the requirements for a
consultation but, because of the nature of the referral, only those services which constitute a specific
assessment are rendered.
EMERGENCY ROOM (ER) PHYSICIAN CONSULTATION
Payment rules:
1. The amount payable for a consultation by an ER Physician will be adjusted to a lesser
assessment fee under either of the following circumstances:
a. the patient is referred by another ER physician in the same hospital; or
b. the service is rendered in any location other than the emergency department or other critical
care area in a hospital, or to a critically ill patient in a hospital.
2. ER reports constitute adequate documentation of the written report of the consultation as long
as the rendering of all constituent elements is clearly documented on all copies of the report. If
the consulting physician fails to ensure that a copy of the ER report is sent to the physician or
nurse practitioner who referred the patient, the amount payable for the service will be adjusted
to the amount payable for an assessment.
Claims submission instruction:
Claims for ER Physician consultations are to be submitted using H055 for a specialist in emergency
medicine (FRCP) and H065 for all other physicians.
SPECIAL SURGICAL CONSULTATION
Definition/Required elements of service:
A special surgical consultation is rendered when a surgeon provides all the appropriate elements of a
regular consultation and is required to devote at least fifty minutes exclusively to the consultation with
the patient.
[Commentary:
The calculation of the 50 minute minimum excludes time devoted to any other service or
procedure for which an amount is payable in addition to the consultation.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP19 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 34 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSULTATIONS
Claims submission instruction:
Claims for special surgical consultations are to be submitted using either A935 or C935, as applicable.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP20 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)