Subsection: Preamble
Parent Section: K
Page Reference: K1
Pages: 517 to 519
Text chunks: 1
Total text length: 8308 characters
Table indicators: {
  "multi_column": false,
  "has_h_p_columns": false,
  "has_asst_surg_anae": false,
  "has_time_requirements": false,
  "has_fee_amounts": false,
  "table_sections": []
}
============================================================

--- PAGE 517 ---
OBSTETRICS
ObstetricsMarch 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
PREAMBLE
SPECIFIC ELEMENTS
In addition to the common elements, most obstetrical services have the same specific elements as
other services listed elsewhere in the Schedule.
Obstetrical Care includes the following kinds of services:
a. Prenatal visits (major or minor or high risk) and postnatal care in the office are assessments
(see General Preamble GP21).
b. Labour-Delivery services have the specific elements of IOP Surgical Procedures identified
with prefix # (see Surgical Preamble SP1).
c. Anaesthetic services have the same specific elements as other services provided by an
anaesthesiologist (see General Preamble GP92).
d. Postnatal care in hospital/home (P007) is the initial assessment of a well patient postpartum
with subsequent assessments of the well patient in the hospital or home until the patient’s
first visit to the physician’s office. The specific elements for each visit are those for
assessments (see General Preamble GP21).
e. Attendance at labour is a service of being in constant or periodic attendance on a patient,
during stages one and two of labour but without completion of the delivery, to provide all
aspects of care. This includes the initial assessment, and such subsequent assessments as
may be indicated, including ongoing monitoring of the patient’s conditions, intervening
except where intervention is a separately billable service. The specific elements are those of
assessments (see General Preamble GP21) except element H, but include providing
premises, equipment, supplies and personnel for any aspects of the specific elements of the
service that are performed outside the place in which the encounter(s) with the patient
occurs.
f. Attendance at delivery, specific elements as for Surgical Assistants’ Services (see General
Preamble GP85).
For all other procedures listed in this section the specific elements are those of IOP surgical
procedures identified with prefix # (see Surgical Preamble SP1) except for removal of Shirodkar
suture for which the specific elements are those for surgical IOP procedures not identified with prefix
#.
Fee schedule codes listed below which do not include providing all premises, equipment and
personnel used to perform the specific elements of the service are identified with prefix #.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) K1 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 518 ---
OBSTETRICS
PREAMBLE
OTHER TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
1. A prenatal major assessment includes a full history, and an examination of all parts or systems
(and may include a detailed examination of one or more parts or systems), an appropriate
record and advice to the patient. All other prenatal visits include the necessary history,
examination, appropriate record and advice to the patient. All prenatal visits (major and minor
and high risk) include pregnancy-related counselling as a form of providing advice to the patient
or the patient’s representative.
A prenatal general assessment is payable after another general assessment only if the reason
for the first assessment does not pertain to the establishment of the antenatal care.
Normal (uncomplicated) prenatal care includes a prenatal general assessment visit, then
monthly visits to 28 weeks, followed by visits every 2nd week to 36 weeks, then weekly visits
until delivery. However, complicated pregnancies may require additional visits. Labour, delivery
and postpartum care are listed separately.
2. If an uncomplicated obstetrical patient is transferred from one physician to another physician for
obstetrical care, the appropriate assessment benefit may be claimed by the second physician,
followed by prenatal visits. This statement does not apply to physicians substituting for each
other or when the second physician sees the patient for the first time in labour. If the obstetrical
patient is referred to a consultant for obstetrical care because of the complexity, obscurity or
seriousness of the case, the consultant may claim a consultation in addition to the prenatal
visits.
3. Illnesses resulting from or associated with pregnancy or false labour requiring added home or
hospital visits, shall be claimed on a per visit basis.
4. When a pregnant patient visits her physician for a condition unrelated to her pregnancy and
apart from her routine scheduled prenatal visits, the physician may claim the appropriate
assessment.
5. Fee schedule codes in this section are subject to the provisions of the Surgical Preamble where
applicable.
6. An assessment is payable for illness resulting from, or associated with, pregnancy or false
labour even if the patient progresses to delivery within the next two days. This does not apply to
patients who are assessed in the first stage of labour and admitted, or are transferred, to the
delivery room from the antenatal floor in labour.
7. The listings under the heading Referred Services may be claimed by the consultant physician in
addition to the appropriate consultation or visit fee. They may not be claimed by physicians
providing obstetrical care to their own patients.
8. If a consultant is requested by another physician to perform a surgical induction of labour, or
emergency removal of a Shirodkar suture (except at delivery) assuming someone else has
inserted the suture, the consultant should claim a consultation fee for this(these) service(s).
9. Medical induction or stimulation of labour may be claimed once per pregnancy by any one
physician and only when carried out for a recognized obstetrical complication(s). The fee listed
is applicable regardless of the time spent by the physician, therefore, detention may not be
claimed.
Amd 12 Draft 1 K2 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 519 ---
OBSTETRICS
PREAMBLE
10.The listings for “Attendance at labour and delivery” and for “Attendance of obstetric
consultant(s) at delivery” may not be claimed by any physician when a patient is transferred to a
second physician for normal obstetrical care.
11. Ordinary immediate care of the newborn is included in the labour-delivery fee and when the
service is rendered by the anaesthetist, it is included in the anaesthetic benefit. A life
threatening emergency situation requiring active resuscitation of the newborn provided by any
physician may be claimed under codes G521, G522, G523. When indicated, endotracheal
intubation and tracheo-bronchial toilet should be billed under G211 and not as G521, G522,
G523.
12.When an obstetrician routinely transfers all newborns to another physician, the latter may not
claim a consultation for these transferals. If the baby is well, the physician should claim newborn
care in hospital plus attendance at maternal delivery (H007/H267) if this service is provided. If
the baby is sick, the physician may claim a general assessment and attendance at maternal
delivery (H007/H267) if this service is provided plus daily visits for as long as his/her services
are required.
13.If an obstetrician who normally cares for newborns him/herself or transfers the care of newborns
to a family physician, refers a newborn to a paediatrician because of the complexity, obscurity or
seriousness of the case, the latter may claim for this service according to the following
guidelines:
a. If attendance at maternal delivery is provided, C263 may be claimed in addition to H267 if a
general assessment of the baby is carried out. A postnatal consultation of the baby, (C265)
may not be claimed in addition to attendance at maternal delivery (H267).
b. If attendance at maternal delivery (H267) is not provided, a postnatal consultation (C265)
may be claimed, if rendered, whether or not a prenatal consultation has already been
claimed.
14.Physicians may claim for assisted breech delivery (P020) when the service includes
spontaneous delivery to the umbilicus, with extraction of the shoulders, arms and head.
15.See General Preamble GP104 for After Hours Premiums.
16.If claims are being submitted in coded form, the obstetrician should add the suffix “A” to the
listed procedural code, the assistant should add the suffix “B” to the listed procedural code, and
the anaesthetist should add the suffix “C” to the listed procedural code.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) K3 Amd 12 Draft 1