Subsection: Preamble
Parent Section: D
Page Reference: D1
Pages: 349 to 352
Text chunks: 1
Total text length: 9893 characters
Table indicators: {
  "multi_column": false,
  "has_h_p_columns": false,
  "has_asst_surg_anae": false,
  "has_time_requirements": false,
  "has_fee_amounts": false,
  "table_sections": []
}
============================================================

--- PAGE 349 ---
DIAGNOSTIC RADIOLOGY
Diagnostic RadiologyMarch 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
PREAMBLE
SPECIFIC ELEMENTS
Diagnostic Radiology procedures are divided into a professional component listed in the column
headed with a "P", and a technical component listed in the column headed with an "H". The technical
component of the procedures subject to the conditions stated under "Diagnostic Services Rendered at
a Hospital" on page GP11, is eligible for payment only if the service is:
a. rendered at a hospital; or
b. rendered at an off-site premise operated by a hospital corporation that has received
approval under section 4 of the Public Hospital Act.
[Commentary:
As described in Regulation 552 of the Health Insurance Act, for a service to be insured, the
interpreting physician must physically be present in Ontario when the interpretation service is
rendered.]
In addition to the common elements, the components of Diagnostic Radiology procedures include the
following specific elements.
For Professional Component P
A. Providing clinical supervision, including approving, modifying and/or intervening in the performance
of the procedure where appropriate, and quality control of all elements of the technical component
of the procedure.
B. Performance of any clinical procedure associated with the diagnostic procedure which is not
separately billable (e.g. injections which are an integral part of the study) and of any fluoroscopy.
C. Where appropriate, post-procedure monitoring, including intervening except where this constitutes
a separately billable service.
D. Interpreting the results of the diagnostic procedure.
E. Providing premises for any aspect(s) of A and D that is (are) performed at a place other than the
place in which the procedure is performed.
If the physician claiming the fee for the service is personally unable to perform elements A, B and C,
these may be delegated to another physician who must personally perform the service. Element D
must be personally performed by the physician who claims for the service.
For Technical Component H
A. Preparing the patient for the procedure.
B. Performing the diagnostic procedure or assisting in the performance of fluoroscopy.
C. Making arrangements for any appropriate follow-up care.
D. Providing records of the results of the procedure to the interpreting physician.
E. Discussion with, and providing information and advice to, the patient or patient’s
representative, whether by telephone or otherwise, on matters related to the service.
F. Preparing and transmitting a written, signed and dated interpretive report of the procedure to the
referring provider.
G. Providing premises, equipment, supplies and personnel for all specific elements of the technical
and professional components except for the premises for any aspect(s) of A and D of the
professional component that is (are) not performed at the place in which the procedure is
performed.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) D1 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 350 ---
DIAGNOSTIC RADIOLOGY
OTHER TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
PREAMBLE
OTHER TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
1. Professional and technical components are claimed separately. Claims for technical component
H are submitted using the listed fee code with suffix B. Claims for professional component P are
submitted using the listed fee code with suffix C.
2. For services rendered outside a hospital setting the only fees billable under the Health
Insurance Act are listed under the column P (use suffix C). Costs for the technical component of
these services are only claimed under the Integrated Community Health Services Centres Act,
2023. Costs for the technical component of services rendered in an ICHSC are listed in the
Schedule of Facility Costs.
3. Benefits for clinical procedures related to x-ray examinations are listed in the following section,
or under Diagnostic and Therapeutic or Surgical Procedures. ‘Clinical Procedures’, in this
context, are those by which contrast media are introduced, except oral or rectal administration
for study of the alimentary tract, and intravenous injections, which are an integral part of the
study, performed by the physician collecting the benefit for the procedure.
4. If less than the minimum number of views are performed, reduce listed fees by 25%.
5. If insured diagnostic radiology procedures yield abnormal findings or if they would yield
information which in the opinion of the radiologist would be insufficient governed by the needs of
the patient and the requirements of the referring provider or practitioner, the radiologist may add
further views and claim for them (if listed).
6. All benefits listed apply to unilateral examinations unless otherwise specified. When a
radiologist is asked to x-ray one extremity only, no additional claim should be made for
comparison x-rays initiated by the radiologist.
7. A stereo pair is to be counted as two views.
8. No additional claim is warranted for the use of the image intensifier in diagnostic radiology.
9. Complex head CT scans are meant to be multiplanar (multidirectional) head CT scans - to
include one or more of the following areas: pituitary fossa, posterior fossa, internal auditory
meati, orbits and related structures, the temporal bone and its contents and the
temporomandibular joints. X400, X401 and X188 are not to be billed in addition to those fees for
complex head studies.
10.Nasal bones or accessory nasal sinuses should not be routinely claimed in skull examination
requests.
11. Mandible X006 and Temporomandibular joints X007 are not both to be routinely claimed on the
same patient but only when specifically ordered.
12.Conventional films of the spine should not be routinely done and claimed for before
myelography. The necessity of having plain film studies of the spine prior to interpreting the
myelographic studies is obvious. It is not essential, however, that these be done at the
institution where the myelogram was done. If they have been done at an outside office, then it is
a matter for the radiologist and the referring provider to have the films available. If they cannot
be made available to the radiologist, it is an acceptable practice for him to do the required
procedure of these areas and to claim for them so that they may be available for interpretation
along with the myelographic study.
13.Lumbar or lumbosacral spine X028 does not include the entire sacrum. An x-ray of the sacrum
may be carried out and claimed for only when specifically indicated.
Amd 12 Draft 1 D2 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 351 ---
DIAGNOSTIC RADIOLOGY
PREAMBLE
14.Three or more views of the chest should not be done routinely and claimed when a chest
examination is requested.
15.Chest studies should not be routinely done and claimed in mammography cases.
16.Fluoroscopy claims should not be submitted for any examination performed by the radiologist
where fluoroscopy is generally regarded as an integral part of the examinations e.g.
examinations of the GI tract, urinary tract, and special procedures.
17.‘Colon - air contrast’ may be claimed when performed according to generally accepted criteria.
The colon should be scrupulously prepared. Five to eight full size views of the abdomen should
be obtained after fluoroscopically controlled introduction of air and barium.
18.‘Oesophagus, stomach and duodenum - double contrast’ presupposes the introduction of gas,
the use of antifoam agent and a suitable barium mixture.
19.'Pharynx and oesophagus - cine or videotape' (X106) should not be claimed routinely with X108
and X109 but only when specifically indicated.
20.Abdomen and chest studies should not be routinely done and claimed in gastrointestinal
examinations.
21.Abdomen and/or pelvis should not be routinely claimed in lumbar spine examination requests.
22.A survey film of the abdomen is a single view. The ordering of additional films should be left to
the discretion of the radiologist who should have the power to determine what examination is
adequate for a specific patient. Obviously, if progress of a long tube is being followed, a survey
film is sufficient. If, however, an intestinal obstruction is being followed, a single film is usually
inadequate.
23.No extra fee should be claimed for rapid sequence IVP.
24.Nephrotomography is covered by the listings for intravenous pyelogram and planigram.
25.Preoperative and Routine Chest X-rays
a. The technical and professional fee components for chest x-ray, X090, X091 and X092 are
not eligible for payment in the routine preoperative preparation or screening of a patient for
non-cardiac, non-thoracic surgery, unless there is a clinical indication requiring a chest x-ray
other than solely for preoperative preparation or screening of the patient.
[Commentary:
Examples of indications could include but are not limited to:
1.suspected active airway or airspace disease
2.workup of shortness of breath
3.metastatic workup]
b. The technical and professional fee components for chest x-ray, X090, X091 and X092 are
only eligible for payment when rendered for a patient who has symptoms, signs or an
indication supported by current clinical practice guidelines relevant to the individual patient’s
circumstances.
[Commentary:
Routine chest x-rays for screening or for admission to hospital without clinical indication are not
payable.]
26.X-ray or CT studies of the lumbar spine should not be routinely ordered or rendered for low back
pain without suspected or known pathology.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) D3 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 352 ---
DIAGNOSTIC RADIOLOGY
PREAMBLE
[Commentary:
Examples of suspected or known pathology include infection, tumour, osteoporosis, ankylosing
spondylitis, fracture, inflammatory process, radicular syndrome, and cauda equina syndrome.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 D4 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)