Subsection: Assessments
Parent Section: GP
Page Reference: GP21
Pages: 35 to 53
Extracted text length: 34932 characters
============================================================

--- PAGE 35 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
ASSESSMENTS
Specific requirements for assessments listed in the “Consultations and Visits” section of the Schedule
are set out below:
GENERAL ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A general assessment is a service, rendered at a place other than in a patient’s home that requires a
full history (the elements of which must include a history of the presenting complaint, family medical
history, past medical history, social history, and a functional inquiry into all body parts and systems),
and, except for breast, genital or rectal examination where not medically indicated or refused, an
examination of all body parts and systems, and may include a detailed examination of one or more
parts or systems.
Payment rules:
General assessments are limited to one per patient per physician per 12 month period unless either of
the following circumstances is met in which case the limit is increased to two per 12 month period:
1. the patient presents a second time with a complaint for which the diagnosis is clearly different
and unrelated to the diagnosis made at the time of the first general assessment; or
2. at least 90 days have elapsed since the date of the last general assessment and the second
assessment is a hospital admission assessment.
The amount payable for general assessments in excess of these limits will be adjusted to a lesser
assessment fee.
PERIODIC HEALTH VISIT
Definition: A periodic health visit (including a primary or secondary school examination) is performed
on a patient, after their second birthday, who presents and reveals no apparent acute physical or
mental illness. The service must include an intermediate assessment, a level 2 paediatric assessment
or a partial assessment focusing on age and gender appropriate history, physical examination, health
screening and relevant counselling.
Payment rules:
Periodic health visit is limited to one per patient per 12 month period per physician.
[Commentary:
Periodic health visits in excess of the limit are not insured.]
Claims submission instruction:
Submit claims for periodic health visits using the fee codes listed below.
No diagnostic code is required unless otherwise specifically listed.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP21 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 36 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Family Practice & Practice in General
Code Description
K017 child
K130 adolescent
K131 adult age 18 to 64 inclusive
K132 adult 65 years of age and older
K133 adult with Intellectual and Developmental
Disability (IDD)
Paediatrics
Code Description
K269 12 to 17 years
K267 2 to 11 years
GENERAL RE-ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A general re-assessment includes all the services listed for a general assessment, with the exception
of the patient’s history, which need not include all the details already obtained in the original
assessment.
Payment rules:
With the exception of general re-assessments rendered for hospital admissions, general re-
assessments are limited to two per 12 month period, per patient per physician. The amount payable
for general re-assessments in excess of this limit will be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP22 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 37 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
ASSESSMENTS
PRE-DENTAL/PRE-OPERATIVE ASSESSMENTS
[Commentary:
For Definition and terms and conditions see page A4.]
SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT AND MEDICAL SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
Specific assessment and medical specific assessment are services rendered by specialists, in a place
other than a patient’s home, and require a full history of the presenting complaint and detailed
examination of the affected part(s), region(s), or system(s) needed to make a diagnosis, and/or
exclude disease, and/or assess function.
Payment rules:
Specific assessments or medical specific assessments are limited to one per patient per physician per
12 month period unless either of the following circumstances are met in which case the limit is
increased to two per patient per physician per 12 month period:
1. the patient presents a second time with a complaint for which a clearly different diagnosis is
made, unrelated to the diagnosis made at the time of the first specific assessment in that 12
month period; or
2. in the case of a medical specific assessment, at least 90 days have elapsed since the date of
the last specific assessment and the second assessment is a hospital admission assessment.
The amount payable for specific or medical specific assessments in excess of this limit will be
adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
In addition, any combination of medical specific assessments and complex medical specific re-
assessments (see below) are limited to 4 per patient per physician per 12 month period. The amount
payable for these services in excess of this limit will be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
SPECIFIC RE-ASSESSMENT AND MEDICAL SPECIFIC RE-ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
Specific re-assessment and medical specific re-assessment are services rendered by specialists and
require a full, relevant history and physical examination of one or more systems.
[Commentary:
As outlined on page GP40, admission assessments are deemed to be a specific re-
assessment or medical specific re-assessment under either of the following circumstances:
1.for those procedures prefixed with a “Z” or noted as an IOP, by a surgical specialist who has
assessed the patient prior to admission in respect of the same illness; or
2.for those patients who have been assessed by a physician and subsequently admitted to the
hospital for the same illness by the same physician.]
Payment rules:
Specific re-assessments or medical specific re-assessments are limited to two per patient per
physician per consecutive 12 month period except for specific re-assessments rendered for hospital
admissions. The amount payable for specific or medical specific re-assessments in excess of this limit
will be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP23 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 38 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
COMPLEX MEDICAL SPECIFIC RE-ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
A complex medical specific re-assessment is a re-assessment of a patient because of the complexity,
obscurity, or seriousness of the patient’s condition and includes all the requirements of a medical
specific re-assessment. The physician must report his/her findings, opinions, or recommendations in
writing to the patient’s primary care physician or the amount payable for the service will be adjusted to
a lesser assessment fee.
Payment rules:
Complex medical specific re-assessments are limited to 4 per patient per physician per 12 month
period. The amount payable for complex medical specific re-assessments in excess of this limit will be
adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
In addition, any combination of medical specific assessments and complex medical specific re-
assessments are limited to 4 per patient per physician per 12 month period. The amount payable for
these services in excess of this limit will be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP24 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 39 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
PARTIAL ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
A partial assessment is the limited service that constitutes a history of the presenting complaint, the
necessary physical examination, advice to the patient and appropriate record.
Chronic Disease Assessment Premium
Definition/ Required elements of service:
Chronic disease assessment premium is payable in addition to the amount payable for an
assessment when all of the following criteria are met:
a. The assessment is a
i. medical specific assessment;
ii. medical specific re-assessment;
iii. complex medical specific re-assessment;
iv. partial assessment; or
v. level 2 paediatric assessment
b. The service is rendered by a physician registered with OHIP as having one of the following
specialty designations:
07(Geriatrics), 15(Endocrinology & Metabolism), 18(Neurology), 26(Paediatrics),
28(Pathology), 31(Physical Medicine), 34(Therapeutic Radiology), 44(Medical Oncology),
46(Infectious Disease), 47(Respiratory Disease), 48(Rheumatology), 61(Haematology),
62(Clinical Immunology).
c. The assessment is rendered in an office setting or an out-patient clinic located in a hospital,
other than an emergency department.
[Commentary:
The chronic disease assessment premium is not payable for assessments rendered to in-
patients of any hospital, patients seen in a long-term care facility or patients seen in an
emergency department.]
d. The patient has an established diagnosis of a chronic disease, documented in the patient’s
medical record.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP25 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 40 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Payment rules:
The following is a list of the diagnostic codes as specified by OHIP that must accompany the claim for
payment purposes:
Diagnostic
Description
Code
042 AIDS
043 AIDS-related complex
044 Other human immunodeficiency virus infection
250 Diabetes mellitus, including complications
286 Coagulation defects (e.g. haemophilia, other factor deficiencies)
282 Hereditary hemolytic anemia (e.g., thalassemia, sickle-cell anemia)
287 Purpura, thrombocytopenia, other haemorrhagic conditions
290 Senile dementia, presenile dementia
299 Child psychoses or autism
313 Behavioural disorders of childhood and adolescence
315 Specified delays in development (e.g. dyslexia, dyslalia, motor retardation)
332 Parkinson's Disease
340 Multiple Sclerosis
343 Cerebral Palsy
345 Epilepsy
402 Hypertensive Heart Disease
428 Congestive Heart Failure
491 Chronic Bronchitis
492 Emphysema
493 Asthma, Allergic Bronchitis
515 Pulmonary Fibrosis
555 Regional Enteritis, Crohn's Disease
556 Ulcerative Colitis
571 Cirrhosis of the Liver
585 Chronic Renal Failure, Uremia
710 Disseminated Lupus Erythaematosus, Generalized Scleroderma, Dermatomyositis
714 Rheumatoid Arthritis, Still's Disease
720 Ankylosing Spondylitis
721 Other seronegative spondyloarthropathies
758 Chromosomal Anomalies
765 Prematurity, low-birthweight infant
902 Educational problems
[Commentary:
The chronic disease assessment premium is not payable in situations where the diagnosis has
not been established.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP26 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 41 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
LEVEL 1 PAEDIATRIC ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A Level 1 paediatric assessment includes one or both of the following:
a. a brief history and examination of the affected part or region or related to a mental or
emotional disorder; or
b. brief advice or information regarding health maintenance, diagnosis, treatment and/or
prognosis.
LEVEL 2 PAEDIATRIC ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A Level 2 paediatric assessment is a paediatric service that requires a more extensive examination
than a level 1 paediatric assessment. It requires a history of the presenting complaint(s), inquiry
concerning, and examination of the affected part(s), region(s), system(s), or mental or emotional
disorder as needed to make a diagnosis, exclude disease, and/or assess function.
A Level 2 paediatric assessment also includes well baby care, which is a periodic assessment of a
well newborn/infant during the first two years of life including complete examination with weight and
measurements, and instructions to the parent(s) or patient’s representative regarding health care.
INTERMEDIATE ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
An intermediate assessment is a primary care general practice service that requires a more extensive
examination than a minor assessment. It requires a history of the presenting complaint(s), inquiry
concerning, and examination of the affected part(s), region(s), system(s), or mental or emotional
disorder as needed to make a diagnosis, exclude disease, and/or assess function.
INTERMEDIATE ASSESSMENT – PRONOUNCEMENT OF DEATH
Definition/Required elements of service:
Intermediate assessment – pronouncement of death is the service of pronouncing a patient dead in a
location other than in the patient’s home. This service may include any counselling of relatives that is
rendered during the same visit, and completion of the death certificate.
[Commentary:
1.For pronouncement of death in the home, see house call assessments (page A4 of the
Schedule).
2.Submit the claim for this service using the diagnostic code for the underlying cause of death,
as recorded on the death certificate, rather than the immediate cause of death.]
MINOR ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A minor assessment includes one or both of the following:
a. a brief history and examination of the affected part or region or related to a mental or
emotional disorder; or
b. brief advice or information regarding health maintenance, diagnosis, treatment and/or
prognosis.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP27 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 42 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
PERIODIC OCULO-VISUAL ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A periodic oculo-visual assessment is an examination of the eye and vision system rendered primarily
to determine if a patient has a simple refractive error (defined as myopia, hypermetropia, presbyopia,
anisometropia or astigmatism) for patients aged 19 or less or aged 65 or more. This service includes
all components required to perform the assessment (ordinarily a history of the presenting complaint,
past medical history, visual acuity examination, ocular mobility examination, slit lamp examination of
the anterior segment, ophthalmoscopy, tonometry) advice and/or instruction to the patient and
provision of a written refractive prescription if required.
Payment rules:
1. This service is limited to one per patient per 12 month period regardless of whether the first
claim is or has been submitted for a service rendered by an optometrist or physician. Services
in excess of this limit or to patients aged 20 to 64 are not insured services.
2. Any other insured service rendered by the same physician (other than an ophthalmologist) to
the same patient the same day as a periodic oculo-visual assessment is not eligible for
payment.
[Commentary:
1.Other consultation and visit codes are not to be used as a substitute for this service when the
limit is reached.
2.Re-assessment following a periodic oculo-visual assessment is to be claimed using a lesser
assessment fee code and diagnostic code 367.]
FIRST VISIT BY PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIAN AFTER HOSPITAL DISCHARGE
E080 First visit after hospital discharge premium, to other service
listed in payment rule 5 below ..................................... add 25.25
Payment rules:
1.Subject to payment rules 2 through 5, E080 is only eligible for payment for a visit with the
patient's primary care physician in the physician’s office or the patient’s home within two
weeks of discharge following in-patient admission to an acute care hospital.
[Commentary:
This premium is not payable for visits rendered to patients in locations other than the
physician's office or patient's home. As such, the premium is not payable for services rendered
in places such as Nursing Homes, Homes for the Aged, chronic care hospitals, etc.]
2.E080 is not eligible for payment if the admission to hospital was for the purpose of obstetrical
delivery unless the mother required admission to an ICU during the hospital stay.
3.E080 is not eligible for payment if the admission to hospital was for the purpose of newborn
care unless the infant required admission to a NICU during the hospital stay.
4.E080 is not eligible for payment if the admission to hospital was for the purpose of performing
day surgery.
5.E080 is only eligible for payment when rendered with the following services:
A001, A003, A004, A007, A008, A261, A262, A263, A264, A888, A900, K004–K008, K013,
K014, K022, K023, K028-K030, K032, K033, K037, K623, P003, P004, P008.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP28 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 43 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
DETENTION
Definition/Required elements of service:
Detention is payable following another insured service when a physician is required to spend
considerable extra time in active treatment and/or monitoring of the patient to the exclusion of all other
work and in this section is based on full 15-minute time units. The specific elements are those for
assessments.
K001 Detention – per full quarter hour............................................. 21.10
Payment rules:
1. Detention is payable under the following circumstances:
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP29 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 44 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Minimum time required in
Service delivery of service before
detention is payable
minor, partial, multiple systems assessment, level 1 and level 2 30 minutes
paediatric assessment, intermediate assessment, focused practice
assessment or subsequent hospital visit
specific or general re-assessment 40 minutes
consultation, repeat consultation, specific or general assessment, 60 minutes
complex dermatology assessment, complex endocrine neoplastic
disease assessment, complex neuromuscular assessment,
complex physiatry assessment, complex respiratory assessment,
enhanced 18 month well baby visit, midwife or aboriginal midwife-
requested anaesthesia assessment, midwife or aboriginal midwife-
requested assessment, midwife or aboriginal midwife-requested
genetic assessment or optometrist-requested assessment
initial assessment-substance abuse, special community medicine 90 minutes
consultation, special family and general practice consultation,
special optometrist-requested assessment, special palliative care
consultation, special surgical consultation or midwife or aboriginal
midwife-requested special assessment
comprehensive cardiology consultation, comprehensive community 120 minutes
medicine consultation, comprehensive endocrinology consultation,
comprehensive family and general practice consultation,
comprehensive geriatric consultation, comprehensive infectious
disease consultation, comprehensive internal medicine
consultation, comprehensive midwife or aboriginal midwife-
requested genetic assessment, comprehensive nephrology
consultation, comprehensive respiratory disease consultation,
comprehensive physical medicine and rehabilitation consultation,
comprehensive rheumatology consultation, special paediatric
consultation, special genetic consultation or special neurology
consultation
extended comprehensive geriatric consultation, extended midwife 180 minutes
or aboriginal midwife-requested genetic assessment, extended
special genetic consultation, extended special paediatric
consultation, or paediatric neurodevelopmental consultation
2. Detention is not eligible for payment in conjunction with diagnostic procedures, obstetrics, and
those therapeutic procedures where the fee includes an assessment (e.g. non-IOP surgery).
3. Detention is not eligible for payment for time spent waiting.
4. For the purposes of calculation of time units payable for detention, the start time commences
after the minimum time required for the assessment or consultation listed in the table has
passed.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP30 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 45 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
5. K001 is not eligible for payment for same patient same day as A190, A191, A192 A195, A197,
A198, A695, A795 or A895.
Claims submission instructions:
Claims for detention are assessed by a medical consultant on an IC basis and require the
submission of a written explanation.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP31 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 46 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
DETENTION-IN-AMBULANCE
Definition/Required elements of service:
Detention-in-Ambulance is payable for constant attendance with a patient in an ambulance, to provide
all aspects of care to the patient. Time is calculated only for that period during which the physician is
in constant attendance with the patient in the ambulance. The service includes an initial examination
and ongoing monitoring of the patient’s condition and all interventions, except in those circumstances
in which the Schedule provides for separate or additional payment for the intervention.
K101 Ground ambulance transfer with patient per quarter hour or
part thereof ......................................................................... 42.10
K111 Air ambulance transfer with patient per quarter hour or part
thereof ................................................................................ 126.40
K112 Return trip without patient to place of origin following air or
ground ambulance transfer, per half hour or major part
thereof ................................................................................ 25.05
Claims submission instruction:
Claims for Detention-in-Ambulance are assessed by a medical consultant on an IC basis and require
the submission of a written explanation.
[Commentary:
K101 is not applicable to attendance in a vehicle other than an ambulance, in which case K001
may apply.]
DETENTION FOR THE TRANSPORT OF DONOR ORGANS
Definition/Required elements of service:
Detention for the Transport of Donor Organs is payable for time travelling to and from a donor centre
(excluding time spent in the donor centre) for the purpose of collecting and transporting to the
recipient hospital (a) donor organ(s), including fresh bone being harvested.
K102 Per quarter hour or part thereof (not eligible for payment with
K001).................................................................................. 20.20
Claims submission instruction:
Claims for Detention for the Transport of Donor Organs are assessed by a medical consultant on an
IC basis and require the submission of a written explanation.
[Commentary:
Claims will be adjudicated on the basis of the most time-efficient means of travel to and from a
donor centre.]
NEWBORN CARE
Definition/Required elements of service:
Newborn care is the routine care of a well newborn for up to the first ten days of life in hospital or
home and includes an initial general assessment and subsequent assessments, as may be indicated,
and instructions to the caregiver(s) regarding the newborn's health care.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP32 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 47 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Payment rules:
1. Newborn care is limited to a maximum of one per patient except when a well baby is transferred
to another hospital in which case the fee for newborn care may be payable to a physician at
both hospitals.
[Commentary:
An example where this is possible is if the transfer occurred because of the state of health of
the mother.]
2. Despite the requirement that to be eligible for a special visit premium the call be non-elective
(see GP65), a special visit premium is payable in addition to this service if a physician is
required to make an additional visit to the hospital outside of his or her normally scheduled
hospital rounds to facilitate discharge of the newborn the same day as the visit.
LOW BIRTH WEIGHT BABY CARE
Definition:
Low birth weight baby care is any assessment of a well newborn/infant weighing less than 2.5
kilograms at birth.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP33 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 48 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
WELL BABY CARE
Definition/Required elements of service:
Well baby care is a periodic assessment of a well newborn/infant during the first two years of life
including complete examination with weight and measurements, and instructions to the parent(s) or
patient’s representative regarding health care.
ENHANCED 18 MONTH WELL BABY VISIT
Definition/Required elements of service:
Enhanced 18 month well baby visit is the service rendered when a physician performs all of the
following in respect of a child from 17-24 months of age:
a. Those services defined as “well baby care”;
b. An 18 month age-appropriate developmental screen; and
c. Review with the patient’s parent/guardian, legal representative or other caregiver of a brief
standardized tool (completed by the patient’s parent/guardian, legal representative or other
caregiver) that aids the identification of children at risk of a developmental disorder.
Medical record requirements:
This service is eligible for payment only when, in addition to the medical record requirements
for well baby care, an 18 month age-appropriate developmental screen and concerns identified
from the review of the brief standardized tool with the parent/guardian, legal representative or
other caregiver are recorded in the patient’s permanent medical record.
[Commentary:
An example of an 18 month age-appropriate developmental screen would be that outlined in
the Rourke Baby Record and an example of a brief standardized tool completed by the parent/
guardian, legal representative or other caregiver that aids the identification of children at risk of
a developmental disorder would be the Nipissing District Developmental Screen or similar
parental questionnaire.]
PSYCHIATRIC ASSESSMENT UNDER THE MENTAL HEALTH ACT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A psychiatric assessment under the Mental Health Act (K620, K623, K624, and K629) includes such
psychiatric history, inquiry, and examination of the patient, as is appropriate, to enable the physician to
complete, and includes completing, the relevant forms and to notify the patient, family, patient
representative and relevant authorities under the Mental Health Act, where appropriate.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP34 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 49 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
E-Assessments
Definition/Required elements of service:
An e-assessment is a service performed by a specialist when a primary care physician or nurse
practitioner requests an opinion and/or recommendations from the specialist for management of a
specific patient by providing information electronically through a secure server (e.g. secure
messaging, EMR). The specialist is required to review all relevant data provided by the primary care
physician or nurse practitioner, including the review of any additional information that may be
submitted subsequent to the initial request. For the purpose of this service, “relevant data” may
include family/patient history, history of the presenting complaint, laboratory and diagnostic tests, and
visual images where indicated.
In addition to the Common Elements, E-assessments include the specific elements of assessments,
as listed in the General Preamble, except for paragraphs A and B.
Payment rules:
1.E-assessments are only eligible for payment if the specialist has provided an opinion and/or
recommendations for patient management to the primary care physician or nurse practitioner
within 30 days from the date of the request. Where a service is requested by a nurse
practitioner the consultant shall provide the report to the nurse practitioner and the patient’s
primary care provider, if applicable.
2.E-assessments are not eligible for payment to the specialist in the following circumstances
a.when the purpose of the electronic communication is to arrange for transfer of the
patient’s care to any physician; or
b.when rendered in whole or in part to arrange for a consultation, a different assessment,
visit, or K-prefix time-based services, procedure(s), or diagnostic investigation(s); or
c.when the specialist renders a K-prefix time-based service for the same patient within 30
days following the request for the specialist e-assessment; or
d.in circumstances where the primary care physician or specialist receives compensation,
other than by fee-for service under this Schedule, for participation in the e-assessment.
3.A consultation, a different assessment or visit rendered by the specialist for the same patient
for the same diagnosis within 60 days following the request for the specialist e-assessment is
only payable as a specific or partial assessment, as appropriate to the service rendered.
4.K738 is eligible for payment to the primary care physician when this physician is required to
collect additional data (for example dermatology or ophthalmology images not present in the
primary care physician’s records) to support the specialist’s e-assessment. K738 is not
eligible for payment where existing data is already available in the primary care physician’s
records for submission to the specialist.
[Commentary:
1.Following the primary care physician’s request, the specialist decides whether an e-
assessment is the most appropriate service in the circumstances. In some cases, direct
patient contact or a consultation by videoconference may be more appropriate.
2.Payment, other than by fee-for-service, includes compensation where the physician receives
remuneration under a salary, primary care, stipend, APP or AFP model.
3.Physicians who receive compensation other than by fee-for-service under this Schedule
should consult their contract for guidance on shadow-billing.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP35 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 50 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Medical record requirements:
An e-assessment is only eligible for payment if all of the following elements are included in the
patient’s permanent medical record of the specialist:
1.patient’s name and health number;
2.name of the primary care physician or nurse practitioner;
3.date of, and reason for, the request; and
4.opinion, diagnosis, advice and/or recommendations of the specialist.
Claims submission instructions:
An e-assessment is only eligible for payment if the specialist includes the primary care
physician’s or nurse practitioner’s provider number with the claim.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP36 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 51 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Initial E-ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
Initial e-assessment is the first e-assessment performed by a particular specialist that is requested by
the primary care physician or nurse practitioner for a specific patient and diagnosis where the
specialist must review all relevant data provided by the primary care physician and provide a written
opinion that includes a diagnosis and/or management advice to the primary care physician or nurse
practitioner.
[Commentary:
The time and intensity of this service is the same as a regular consultation. The specialist may
choose to return their opinion by phone, however, a written opinion must be provided
electronically or by mail.]
Payment rules:
Initial e-assessments are limited to a maximum of one per patient per specialist per 12 month
period unless the primary care physician or nurse practitioner makes a second request in
relation to a complaint for which a clearly different diagnosis is made, unrelated to the
diagnosis made at the time of the first e-assessment in that same 12 month period, in which
case the limit is increased to a maximum of two per patient per specialist per 12 month period.
[Commentary:
If a subsequent e-assessment is related to the diagnosis made at the time of the initial e-
assessment, then this service is payable as a repeat e-assessment, follow-up e-assessment or
minor e-assessment as appropriate to the service rendered.]
repeat E-ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
Repeat e-assessment is the first e-assessment performed by a particular specialist following an initial
e-assessment or consultation by that specialist that is requested by the primary care physician or
nurse practitioner for the same diagnosis where the specialist must review all relevant data provided
by the primary care physician or nurse practitioner and provide an opinion that includes management
advice to the primary care physician or nurse practitioner.
[Commentary:
The time and intensity of this service is the same as a specific assessment. The specialist may
choose to return their opinion by phone.]
Payment rules:
Repeat e-assessments are limited to a maximum of one per patient per physician per 12 month
period unless the primary care physician or nurse practitioner makes a second request in
relation to a complaint for which a clearly different diagnosis is made, unrelated to the
diagnosis made at the time of the first e- assessment in that same 12 month period, in which
case the limit is increased to a maximum of two per patient per physician per 12 month period.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP37 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 52 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Follow-up E-ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
A follow-up e-assessment is the limited e-assessment rendered for follow-up by the specialist who
has previously rendered any insured service to the patient for the same diagnosis. The specialist must
review all relevant information submitted and provide an opinion and/or management advice to the
primary care physician or nurse practitioner.
[Commentary:
The time and intensity of the service is the same as a partial assessment. The specialist may
choose to return their opinion by phone.]
Payment rules:
Follow-up e-assessment is limited to a maximum of:
1.one (1) service per patient per day, same physician;
2.four (4) services per patient same physician per 12 month period; and
3.one thousand (1000) services per physician per 12 month period.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP38 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 53 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
MINOR E-ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
A minor e-assessment is a brief e-assessment rendered by the specialist. The specialist must review
all relevant information submitted and provide an answer to the primary care physician’s or nurse
practitioner’s specific clinical question.
Payment rules:
Minor e-assessment is limited to a maximum of:
1.one (1) service per patient per day, same physician;
2.twelve (12) services per patient same physician per 12 month period; and
3.two thousand (2000) services per physician per 12 month period.
[Commentary:
A minor e-assessment is where the primary care physician or nurse practitioner may ask a
specific question related to the patient where the information provided is limited and the
question asked is very specific. An example is where the primary care physician has initiated a
treatment recommended by the specialist, and the primary care physician requests a brief
email response related to proper dosing adjustments. One service may include multiple emails.
The specialist may choose to return their opinion by phone.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP39 Amd 12 Draft 1