Subsection: Definitions
Parent Section: GP
Page Reference: GP2
Pages: 16 to 21
Extracted text length: 13348 characters
============================================================

--- PAGE 16 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
The words, phrases, and abbreviations defined below are italicized throughout the General Preamble
for cross-reference. Unless otherwise specified, the following terms and expressions have the
following meanings:
A. Age Definitions
adolescent a person 16 or 17 years of age
adult a person 18 years of age and older
child a person 2 years to and including 15 years of age
infant a person from 29 days up to, and less than, 2 years of age
newborn a person from birth up to, and including, 28 days of age
B. Time Definitions
12 month any period of 12 consecutive months
period
calendar year the period from January 1 to December 31
day a calendar day
fiscal year from April 1 of one year to March 31 of the following year
month a calendar month
week any period of 7 consecutive days
C. Other Definitions
Act Health Insurance Act
Body Mass the ratio of the patient’s mass (measured in kilograms) to the square of the
Index (BMI) patient’s height (measured in metres)
Bariatric a facility that is approved and funded by the Ministry of Health for the
Regional assessment and treatment of morbid obesity for persons who have been
Assessment referred to the facility for that purpose.
and Treatment
Centre (RATC)
common the components that are included in all insured physician services
elements
constituent the common elements and, where applicable, the specific elements of an
elements insured service
CPSO College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario
Dental Surgeon a health care practitioner who meets the definition of “dental surgeon” as set
out in Regulation 552 under the Act, and who has been issued an OHIP
registration number.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP2 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 17 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
emergency an office or other place, including Urgent Care Centres, Walk-in Clinics,
department Extended Hours Clinics, or other settings (other than a hospital emergency
equivalent department) in which the only insured services provided are to patients who
do not have pre-arranged appointments
general all forms of anaesthesia except local infiltration
anaesthesia
“H” fee a fee set out in the Schedule for the technical component of a diagnostic
service provided either in a hospital or in an offsite premise operated by the
hospital corporation that has received approval under section 4 of the Public
Hospitals Act
holiday (for other than “H” prefix emergency department listings and Emergency
Department Equivalent - A888) means all of the following:
1. Family Day, Good Friday, Victoria Day, Canada Day, Civic Holiday, Labour Day,
Thanksgiving, New Year’s Day, and if the holiday falls on a Saturday or Sunday either
the Friday before or the Monday following the holiday, as determined at the choice of the
physician.
2. Boxing Day and if Boxing Day falls on a Saturday, the Monday following Boxing Day.
3. Christmas Day and
a. if Christmas Day falls on a Sunday, the Friday before Christmas Day;
or
b. if Christmas Day falls on a Saturday, the Friday before and the Monday following
Christmas Day.
holiday (for “H” prefix emergency department listings and Emergency Department
Equivalent - A888) means all of the following:
Family Day, Good Friday, Victoria Day, Canada Day, Civic Holiday, Labour Day,
Thanksgiving, New Year’s Day, December 25 through December 31 (inclusive) and,
a. if Christmas Day falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the Friday before Christmas Day;
and
b. if New Year’s Day falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the Monday following New Year’s
Day;
and
c. if Canada Day falls on a Saturday or Sunday either the Friday before or the Monday
following Canada Day, as determined at the choice of the physician.
[Commentary:
1.Only services rendered on a holiday as defined above and listed as a holiday premium or
service, e.g. certain special visit premiums, after-hours premiums and H-code emergency
department services, are eligible for payment as holiday claims.
2.Special visit premiums are not eligible for payment with A888.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP3 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 18 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
home patient’s place of residence including a multiple resident dwelling or single
location that shares a common external building entrance or lobby, such as
an apartment block, rest or retirement home, commercial hotel, motel or
boarding house, university or boarding school residence, hostel,
correctional facility, or group home and other than a hospital or Long-Term
Care institution
ICHSC Integrated Community Health Services Centre under the Integrated
Community Health Services Centres Act, 2023.
independent a procedural code with a “Z” prefix (which is payable in addition to the
operative amount payable for an assessment)
procedure
(IOP)
major the consultation or assessment where the decision to operate is made,
preoperative regardless of the time interval between the major preoperative visit and the
visit surgery
may include when “may” or “may include” are used in the description of a listed service,
all of the other services, or elements of, or components of insured services
that are referred to following the terms “may”, “may include”, and that are
performed in conjunction with the listed service are optional, but when
rendered are included in the amount payable for the listed service
medical a designated MOH physician
consultant
MOH Ministry of Health
most the attending physician who is primarily responsible for the day-to-day care
responsible of a hospital in-patient
physician
not eligible for when a service or a claim submitted for a service is described as “not
payment eligible for payment”, the service remains an insured service for which the
amount payable is zero
[Commentary:
Patients cannot be charged for services described as “not eligible for payment” as they remain
insured services.]
nurse has the same meaning as “registered nurse in the extended class” as set
practitioner out in Regulation 552 under the Act.
OHIP Ontario Health Insurance Plan
OMA Ontario Medical Association
only eligible for when a service is described as “only eligible for payment” when certain
payment conditions are met and those conditions are not met, the service becomes
not eligible for payment.
[Commentary:
Patients cannot be charged for services described as “only eligible for payment” as they remain
insured services.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP4 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 19 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
palliative care care provided to a terminally ill patient in the final year of life where the
decision has been made that there will be no aggressive treatment of the
underlying disease and care is to be directed to maintaining the comfort of
the patient until death occurs
patient’s the legal representative of a patient
representative
“P” fee the fee for the professional component of a diagnostic service
professional a class of service listed in the Schedule headed by a column listed “P” or
component with “professional component” listed opposite the service
[Commentary:
Additional information including the requirements for performing the professional component is
found in the individual preambles to the applicable sections of the Schedule.]
referral written request by a physician, nurse practitioner, or dental surgeon in
connection with an insured dental procedure rendered in a hospital for the
provision of expert services by another physician to the patient of the
referring physician, nurse practitioner, or dental surgeon.
rendered means that the service must be personally performed by the physician and
personally by may not be delegated to any other person. Services that are required to be
the physician “rendered personally by the physician” are uninsured if this requirement is
not met
Schedule Schedule of Benefits for Physician Services
specialist a physician who holds one of the following:
1. a certification issued by the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada
(RCPSC);
2. a certificate of registration issued by the CPSO to a physician who has successfully
completed the Assessment program for International Medical Graduates (APIMG) in a
recognized medical or surgical specialty;
3. a certificate of registration as a specialist issued by the CPSO to a physician employed;
– in a full-time teaching or full-time research appointment in a recognized medical
or surgical specialty other than family or general practice; and
– by the faculty of medicine of an Ontario university at the rank of assistant
professor or higher;
4. a certificate of registration issued on the order of the Registration Committee of the
CPSO to a physician who practices in a recognized medical or surgical specialty other
than family or general practice, where the requirements of registration are otherwise not
met, and to which certificate terms, conditions, or limitations may be attached; or
5. an equivalent certificate as described in 2, 3 or 4 above, issued by another Canadian
jurisdiction to a physician who is exempted from subsections 9 (1) and (3) of the
Medicine Act, 1991 by a regulation made under that Act.
specific specific components, in addition to the common elements, that are included
elements in particular insured physician services found in the General Preamble or
the specialty section of the Schedule
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP5 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 20 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
“T” fee the fee for the technical component of a service listed in the Pulmonary
Function Studies section of the Schedule
technical a class of service listed in the Schedule headed by a column listed “H” or “T”
component or with “technical component” listed opposite the service
[Commentary:
Additional information including the requirements for performing the technical component is
found in the individual preambles to the applicable sections of the schedule.]
transferal permanent or temporary complete transfer of the responsibility for the care
of the patient from one physician to another
[Commentary:
A transferal occurs, for example, where the first physician is leaving temporarily on holidays
and is unable to continue to treat the patient.]
uninsured a service that is not prescribed as “insured” under the Act
service
with or without when “with or without” are used in the description of a listed service, all of
the other services, or elements of, or components of insured services that
are referred to following the terms “with or without”, and that are performed
in conjunction with the listed service are optional, but when rendered are
insured and are included in the amount payable for the listed service
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP6 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 21 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
MAXIMUMS, MINIMUMS AND TIME OR UNIT-BASED SERVICES
In this Schedule when the amount payable for a service is described:
a. In terms of a maximum number of services without reference to a specific time period to
which the maximum applies, this means that the maximum refers to a maximum number of
services per patient per day. Those services rendered to the same patient on the same day
in excess of the maximum for that patient on that day are not eligible for payment.
b. In terms of a maximum number of services with reference to a specific time period to which
the maximum applies, the services are calculated per patient and the number of services is
based upon services rendered chronologically. Those services rendered to the same patient
during that specific time period in excess of the maximum for that patient are not eligible for
payment.
c. In terms of a maximum with reference to a specific part of the anatomy, this means a
maximum number of services per patient per day. Those services rendered in excess of the
maximum for that specific part of the anatomy per patient on that day are not eligible for
payment.
d. In terms of a minimum number of services without reference to a specific time period to
which the minimum applies, this means that the minimum refers to a minimum number of
services per patient per day. With the exception of those services listed in the “Diagnostic
Radiology” section of the Schedule or unless specifically stated otherwise, where less than
the number of services required to satisfy the minimum are rendered, the services are not
eligible for payment.
e. In terms of “repeat” or “repeats”, except with respect to repeat consultations or unless
otherwise stated, this means the same service(s) is rendered to the same patient by the
same physician on the same day.
f. In terms of a minimum required duration of time, the physician must record on the patient’s
permanent medical record or chart the time when the insured service started and ended. If
the patient’s permanent medical record or chart does not include this required information,
the service is not eligible for payment.
g. Based upon the number of “units” of service rendered, the physician must record on the
patient’s permanent medical record or chart the time when the insured service started and
ended. If the patient’s permanent medical record or chart does not include this required
information, the service is not eligible for payment.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP7 Amd 12 Draft 1