Subsection: Hospital and Institutional Consultations and Assessments
Parent Section: GP
Page Reference: GP40
Pages: 54 to 67
Text chunks: 1
Total text length: 32651 characters
Table indicators: {
  "multi_column": false,
  "has_h_p_columns": false,
  "has_asst_surg_anae": false,
  "has_time_requirements": false,
  "has_fee_amounts": false,
  "table_sections": []
}
============================================================

--- PAGE 54 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
ACUTE CARE HOSPITAL – NON-EMERGENCY IN-PATIENT SERVICES (“C” PREFIX
SERVICES)
A. Admission Assessment – General Requirements
Definition:
a. An admission assessment is the initial assessment of the patient rendered for the purpose
of admitting a patient to hospital.
b. The admitting physician is the physician who renders the admission assessment.
Payment rules:
1. Except as outlined below in paragraph 3, when the admitting physician has not previously
assessed the patient for the same presenting illness within 90 days of the admission
assessment, the admission assessment constitutes a consultation, general or medical specific
or specific assessment depending on the specialty of the physician, the nature of the service
rendered and any applicable payment rules.
2. Except as outlined below in paragraph 3, if the admitting physician has previously assessed the
patient for the same presenting illness within 90 days of the admission assessment, the
admission assessment constitutes a general re-assessment or specific re-assessment
depending on the specialty of the physician, the nature of the service rendered and any
applicable payment rules.
3. When a hospital in-patient is transferred from one physician to another physician, only one
consultation, general or specific assessment or reassessment is eligible for payment
per patient admission. The amount eligible for payment for services in excess of this limit will be
adjusted to a lesser assessment fee. An additional admission assessment is not eligible for
payment when a hospital inpatient is transferred from one physician to another physician within
the same hospital.
Admission Assessments by Specialists:
When a patient has been assessed by a specialist in the emergency room (ER) or out-patient
department (OPD) and that physician renders a service described as a consultation, specific
assessment, or medical specific assessment and subsequently admits the patient to hospital, the
initial consultation, specific, or medical specific assessment constitutes the admission assessment.
When a patient has been assessed by a specialist in the ER or OPD, and that physician renders any
other assessment other than those listed in the paragraph immediately above, and that physician
subsequently admits the patient to hospital, an admission assessment is eligible for payment in
addition to the initial assessment, if each service is rendered separately.
[Commentary:
In accordance with the surgical preamble, a hospital admission assessment by the surgeon is
not eligible for payment, unless it is the “major pre-operative visit” (i.e., the consultation or
assessment which may be claimed when the decision to operate is made and the operation is
scheduled).]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP40 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 55 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
Admission Assessments by General and Family Practitioners:
When a patient has been assessed by a general or family practitioner in the emergency room (ER) or
out-patient department (OPD) and that physician renders a service described as a consultation,
general assessment, or general re-assessment and subsequently admits the patient to hospital, the
initial consultation, general assessment, general re-assessment constitutes the admission
assessment.
When a patient has been assessed by a general or family practitioner in the ER or OPD and that
physician renders any other assessment other than those listed in the paragraph immediately above,
and subsequently admits the patient to hospital, an admission assessment is eligible for payment in
addition to the initial assessment, if each assessment is rendered separately.
Payment rules:
A933/C933/C003/C004 are not eligible for payment for an admission assessment for an elective
surgery patient when a pre-operative assessment has been rendered to the same patient within 30
days of admission by the same physician.
Admission Assessments by General and Family Practitioners in an Emergency
Department Funded under an Emergency Department Alternative Funding Agreement:
When a patient has been assessed by the patient's general or family practitioner in an emergency
room and that physician subsequently admits the patient to hospital, the General/Family Physician
Emergency Department Assessment constitutes the admission assessment if the physician remains
the most responsible physician for the patient.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP41 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 56 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
Admission Assessments by Emergency Physicians:
When a patient has been assessed by an emergency physician in the ER or OPD and that physician
renders a service described as a consultation, general assessment, or general re-assessment and
subsequently admits the patient to hospital as the most responsible physician or that physician is
asked to perform the admission assessment (even though the patient is admitted under a different
most responsible physician), the initial consultation, general assessment, or general re-assessment
constitutes the admission assessment.
When a patient has been assessed by an emergency physician in the ER or OPD and that physician
renders any other assessment other than those listed in the paragraph immediately above, and
subsequently renders the admission assessment, (even if the patient is admitted under a different
most responsible physician), the admission assessment is payable as C004, in addition to the initial
assessment, if both services are rendered separately.
Admission Assessment by the Most Responsible Physician (MRP) Premium
E082 Admission assessment by the MRP, to admission
assessment .......................................................... add 30%
Payment rules:
1.E082 is only eligible for payment once per patient per hospital admission.
2.E082 is only eligible for payment:
a.if the physician establishes that he or she does not receive any direct or indirect
remuneration from a hospital or hospital foundation for rendering in-patient clinical
services; or
b.where the physician receives any direct or indirect remuneration from a hospital or
hospital foundation for rendering in-patient clinical services, if the physician establishes
that such remuneration has been reduced by an amount equal to the amount that would
be eligible for payment to the physician had he or she not received any such direct or
indirect remuneration.
3.E082 is not eligible for payment for transfers within the same hospital.
4.E082 is not applicable to any other service or premium.
[Commentary:
1.E082 is only eligible for payment when the admitting physician is the MRP. If the MRP does
not render the admission assessment, E082 is not eligible for payment for any service
rendered by any physician during that hospital admission.
2.E082 is not eligible for payment for a patient admitted for obstetrical delivery or for a
newborn.
3.E082 is not applicable for any consultation or assessment related to day surgery.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP42 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 57 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
B. Subsequent Visit
Definition:
A subsequent visit is any routine assessment in hospital following the hospital admission assessment.
Attendance at Surgery: If, in the interest of the patient, the referring physician is asked to be
present by the patient or the patient’s representative, but does not assist at the procedure, the
attendance at surgery by the referring physician constitutes a hospital subsequent visit.
Multidisciplinary care: Except where a single service for a team of physicians is listed in this
Schedule (e.g. the weekly team fee for dialysis), when the complexity of the medical condition
requires the services of several physicians in different disciplines, each physician visit
constitutes a subsequent visit.
Payment rules:
1. Except in the circumstances outlined in paragraphs 2 and 3, or when a patient is referred from
one physician to another (see Claims submission instruction below), subsequent visits are
limited to one per patient, per day for the first 5 weeks after admission, 3 visits per week from 6
to 13 weeks after admission, and 6 visits per month after 13 weeks. Services in excess of the
limit are not eligible for payment.
2. After 5 weeks of hospitalization, any assessment in hospital required as a result of an acute
intercurrent illness in excess of the weekly or monthly limits set out above constitutes C121 –
“additional visit due to intercurrent illness”. The weekly or monthly limits set out above do not
apply to additional visits due to intercurrent illness.
3. Pediatric subsequent visits (C262) are limited to one per patient, per day for the duration of the
admission.
4. When a physician is already in the hospital and assesses one of his/her own patients or patients
transferred to his/her care, the service constitutes a subsequent visit. If a physician assesses
another physician’s patient on an emergency basis, the General Listings (“A” prefix) apply.
Claims submission instruction:
When a hospital in-patient is referred from one physician to another physician, the date the second
physician assessed the patient for the first time is considered the “admission date” for the purposes of
determining the appropriate subsequent visit fee code.
[Commentary:
When a hospital in-patient is transferred from one physician to another physician, subsequent
visits by the second physician are calculated based on the actual admission date of the
patient.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP43 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 58 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
C. Subsequent visit by the Most Responsible Physician (MRP)
Subsequent visit by the MRP – day following the hospital admission assessment (C122)
Definition:
Subsequent visit by the MRP - day following the hospital admission assessment is payable to the
physician identified as the patient’s MRP for rendering a subsequent visit on this day.
Subsequent visit by the MRP – second day following the hospital admission assessment
(C123)
Definition:
Subsequent visit by the MRP - second day following the hospital admission assessment is payable to
the physician identified as the patient’s MRP for rendering a subsequent visit on this day.
Payment rules:
1. C122, C123 are limited to a maximum of one each per hospital admission.
[Commentary:
C122, C123 are only payable for visits rendered by the MRP. Services rendered by physicians
who are not the MRP may be payable at a lesser visit fee.]
2. C122, C123 are not eligible for payment:
a. when rendered to the same patient the same day as C124 (Subsequent visit by the MRP -
day of discharge);
b. for a patient admitted for obstetrical delivery or newborn care; or
c. for any visit rendered by a surgeon during the 2 days prior to non-Z prefix surgery.
3. C122, C123 are not payable for a subsequent visit rendered by a surgeon to a hospital in-
patient following non-Z prefix surgery.
[Commentary:
The first and second post-operative visits by the surgeon to a hospital in-patient following non-
Z prefix surgery constitute post-operative visits payable at the appropriate specialty specific
subsequent visit fee.]
4. When a patient is transferred to another physician within the same hospital during either of
these days, C122 or C123 are only payable to the physician who was the MRP for the majority
of the day.
5. When a patient is transferred to another physician at a different hospital, the day of transfer shall
be deemed for payment purposes to be the day of admission.
6. Only one of C122 or C142 is eligible for payment for the same patient during the same hospital
admission. Only one of C123 or C143 is eligible for payment for the same patient during the
same hospital admission.
[Commentary:
For first and second subsequent visits by the MRP following transfer from an Intensive Care
Area (C142, C143), see General Preamble page GP46.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP44 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 59 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
Subsequent visit by the MRP - day of discharge (C124)
Definition/Required elements of service:
Subsequent visit by the MRP – day of discharge is payable to the physician identified as the MRP for
rendering a subsequent visit on the day of discharge, and, in addition, requires completion of the
discharge summary by the physician within 48 hours of discharge, arranging for follow-up of the
patient (as appropriate) and prescription of discharge medications if any.
The discharge summary must include as a minimum the following information:
a. reason for admission;
b. procedures performed during the hospitalization;
c. discharge diagnosis; and
d. medications on discharge.
Payment rules:
1.C124 is only payable to the MRP and limited to one service per hospital admission.
2.C124 is not eligible for payment under any of the following circumstances:
a.The patient was discharged within 48 hours of admission to hospital (calculated from the
actual date of admission to hospital);
b.The admission was for obstetrical delivery unless the mother required admission to an
ICU, with subsequent transfer and discharge from another unit within the hospital during
the hospital stay;
c.The admission was for newborn care unless the infant was admitted to a NICU, with
subsequent transfer and discharge from another unit within the hospital during the
hospital stay;
d.For transfers within the same hospital; or
e.For discharges directly from a NICU or ICU where NICU or ICU critical care per diem
services were rendered the same day.
[Commentary:
In the case of conflicting claims for this service, the physician to whom the patient has rostered
(virtual or actual) may receive the payment for the service.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP45 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 60 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
D. First subsequent visit by the MRP following transfer from an Intensive Care Area
First subsequent visit by the MRP following transfer from an Intensive Care Area (C142)
Definition:
First subsequent visit by the MRP following patient’s transfer from an Intensive Care Area (including
Neonatal Intensive Care) where the patient was receiving Critical Care, Ventilatory Support,
Comprehensive Care or Neonatal Intensive Care services immediately prior to the time of the transfer
to an acute care hospital bed in the same hospital.
Second subsequent visit by the MRP following transfer from an Intensive Care Area
(C143)
Definition:
Second subsequent visit by the MRP following patient’s transfer from an Intensive Care Area
(including Neonatal Intensive Care) where the patient was receiving Critical Care, Ventilatory Support,
Comprehensive Care or Neonatal Intensive Care services immediately prior to the time of the transfer
to an acute care hospital bed in the same hospital.
Payment rules:
1. C142, C143 are limited to a maximum of one each per hospital admission.
[Commentary:
1.C142, C143 are only payable for visits rendered by the MRP. Services rendered by
physicians who are not the MRP may be eligible for payment at a lesser visit fee.
2.C142 or C143 are not eligible for payment for visits rendered to patients who were in an
Intensive Care Area only for monitoring purposes.]
2. C142, C143 are not eligible for payment to the same physician who rendered Critical Care,
Ventilatory Support, Comprehensive Care or Neonatal Intensive Care services prior to the
patient’s transfer.
3. Only one of C122 or C142 is eligible for payment for the same patient during the same hospital
admission. Only one of C123 or C143 is eligible for payment for the same patient during the
same hospital admission.
[Commentary:
For Subsequent visit by the MRP – first and second day following the hospital admission
assessment (C122, C123), see General Preamble page GP44.]
4. C142, C143 are not eligible for payment:
a. when rendered to the same patient the same day as C124 (Subsequent visit by the MRP –
day of discharge), or
b. for any visit rendered by a surgeon during the 2 days prior to non-Z prefix surgery.
5. C142, C143 are not payable for visits rendered by a surgeon to a hospital in-patient in the first
two weeks following non-Z prefix surgery.
[Commentary:
The first and second post-operative visits by the surgeon to a hospital in-patient following non-
Z prefix surgery constitute post-operative visits payable at the appropriate specialty specific
subsequent visit fee.]
6. When a patient is transferred to another physician within the same hospital, C142 or C143 are
only payable to the physician who was the MRP for the majority of the day of the transfer.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP46 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 61 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
E. Subsequent visit and palliative care visit by the MRP premium
E083 Subsequent visit by the MRP, to subsequent visits and C122,
C123, C124, C142, C143, C882 or C982............. add 30%
E084 Saturday, Sunday or Holiday subsequent visit by the MRP, to
subsequent visits and C122, C123, C124, C142, C143,
C882 or C982.......................................................Add 45%
Payment rules:
1.E084 is only eligible for payment for subsequent visits provided on Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays.
2.Only one of E083 or E084 is eligible for payment per patient per day.
3.E084 is only eligible for payment when the MRP is from one of the following specialties: 00
(Family Practice and Practice in General), 02 (Dermatology), 07 (Geriatrics), 11 (Critical Care
Medicine), 12 (Emergency Medicine), 13 (Internal Medicine),15 (Endocrinology &
Metabolism), 16 (Nephrology), 18 (Neurology), 19 (Psychiatry), 22 (Genetics), 26
(Paediatrics), 28 (Pathology), 31 (Physical Medicine), 34 (Radiation Oncology), 41
(Gastroenterology), 44 (Medical Oncology), 46 (Infectious Disease), 47 (Respiratory
Disease), 48 (Rheumatology), 60 (Cardiology), 61 (Haematology), 62 (Clinical Immunology).
4.E083 or E084 are only eligible for payment:
a.if the physician establishes that he or she does not receive any direct or indirect
remuneration from a hospital or hospital foundation for rendering in-patient clinical
services; or
b.where the physician receives any direct or indirect remuneration from a hospital or
hospital foundation for rendering in-patient clinical services, if the physician establishes
that such remuneration has been reduced by an amount equal to the amount that would
be eligible for payment to the physician had he or she not received any such direct or
indirect remuneration.
5.E083 or E084 are not eligible for payment for palliative care visits to patients in designated
palliative care beds in Long-Term Care Institutions.
6.E083 or E084 are not applicable to any other service or premium.
[Commentary:
1.E083 or E084 are only eligible for payment with subsequent visits and palliative care visits
rendered by the MRP.
2.Examples of subsequent visits eligible for payment with E083 are C002, C007, C009, C132,
C137, C139, C032, C037 or C039. Examples of subsequent visits eligible for payment with
E084 are C002, C007, C009, C132, C137, C139, C152, C157 or C159.
3.E083 or E084 are not eligible for payment with C121 additional visits for intercurrent illness.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP47 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 62 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
F. Concurrent Care
Definition/Required elements of service:
Concurrent care is any routine assessment rendered in hospital by the consultant following the
consultant’s first major assessment of the patient when the family physician remains the most
responsible physician but the latter requests continued directive care by the consultant.
Payment rules:
Claims for concurrent care are limited to 4 per week during the first week of concurrent care, and 2
claims per week thereafter. Services in excess of this limit are not eligible for payment.
G. Supportive Care
Definition:
Supportive care is any routine visit rendered in hospital by the family physician who is not actively
treating the case where:
a. the patient is under the care of another physician;
b. the supportive care is rendered at the request of the patient or family; and
c. the care is provided for purposes of liaison or reassurance.
Payment rules:
Claims for supportive care are limited to 4 per week during the first week of supportive care,
determined from the date of the first supportive visit, and 2 claims per week thereafter. Services in
excess of this limit are not eligible for payment.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP48 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 63 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
LONG-TERM CARE INSTITUTION: NON-EMERGENCY IN-PATIENT SERVICES
("W" PREFIX SERVICES)
These services apply to patients in chronic care hospitals, convalescent hospitals, nursing homes,
homes for the aged and designated chronic or convalescent care beds in hospitals other than patients
in designated palliative care beds - “W” prefix services.
A. Admission Assessment
Type 1 Admission Assessment
Definition/Required elements of service:
A Type 1 admission assessment is a general assessment rendered to a patient on admission.
Payment rules:
If the physician has rendered a consultation, general assessment, or general re-assessment of the
patient prior to admission, the amount payable for the service will be adjusted to a lesser fee.
Type 2 Admission Assessment
Definition/Required elements of service:
A Type 2 admission assessment occurs when the admitting physician makes an initial visit to assess
the condition of the patient following admission and has previously rendered a consultation, general
assessment or general re-assessment of the patient prior to admission.
Type 3 Admission Assessment
Definition/Required elements of service:
A Type 3 admission assessment is a general re-assessment of a patient who is re-admitted to the
long-term care institution after a minimum 3 day stay in another institution.
B. Subsequent Visit
Definition:
A subsequent visit is any routine assessment following the patient’s admission to a long-term care
institution.
Payment rules:
Claims for these subsequent visits are subject to the limits described with each individual service as
found under the applicable specialty in the Consultations and Visits section.
Claims submission instructions:
1. Submit claims for acute intercurrent illnesses requiring visits other than special visits using
W121. When acute intercurrent illness requires a special visit, submit claims using the
appropriate fees under General Listings (“A” prefix) and premiums.
[Commentary:
Claims for W121 are payable for visits for acute intercurrent illness whenever rendered. Such
claims are not dependent on whether the monthly limit on the number of subsequent visits has
been reached.]
2. When a physician is already in the institution and is asked to assess one of his/her own in-
patients, the subsequent visit listings (“W” prefix) apply. However, if he/she is already in the
institution and asked to assess another physician’s patient on an emergency basis, submit
claims using the General Listings (“A” prefix).
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP49 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 64 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT - “H” PREFIX EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT SERVICES
For the purpose of emergency department – “H” prefix emergency department services:
“Hospital Urgent Care Clinic” means a clinic operated by a hospital corporation that provides services
similar to some or all of those provided by an emergency department but that is open to the public for
less than 24 hours in any given 24 hour period.
"Emergency Department Physician" means a physician:
a. working in a hospital emergency department specifically for the purpose of rendering
services to unscheduled patients who attend the emergency department to receive
physician services; or
b. working in a Hospital Urgent Care Clinic specifically for the purpose of rendering services to
unscheduled patients who attend the Hospital Urgent Care Clinic to receive physician
services.
There are specific “H” prefix listings (H1 – codes) for consultations, multiple systems assessments,
minor assessments, comprehensive assessment and care and re-assessments rendered by the
Emergency Department Physician. With the exception of the consultation fee (where a specific fee
code exists for a specialist in emergency medicine), any physician on duty (regardless of specialty) in
the emergency department must submit using these listings.
The “H” prefix listings under the heading, “Emergency Department Physician” on pages A12, A13 in
the Consultations and Visits section of the Schedule, apply in the following circumstances:
a. when a full- or part-time Emergency Department Physician is working for a
pre-arranged designated period of time or shift; or
b. for services rendered by an on-call physician where the service does not qualify for claiming
a special visit premium.
PALLIATIVE CARE ASSESSMENT
Definition: A palliative care assessment is any routine assessment rendered by the most
responsible physician for the purpose of providing palliative care to a patient other than one in a
designated palliative care bed at the time the assessment was rendered.
Claims submission instruction:
Submit claims for palliative care visits, other than those in designated palliative care beds, using the
appropriate "C" or "W" prefix palliative care fee schedule codes.
[Commentary:
1.Palliative care visits to patients in designated palliative care beds, regardless of facility type,
are to be claimed using C882 or C982, as applicable.
2.Services rendered to patients whose unexpected death occurs after prolonged hospitalization
for another diagnosis unrelated to the cause of death do not constitute palliative care
assessments.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP50 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 65 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
MONTHLY MANAGEMENT OF A NURSING HOME OR HOME FOR THE AGED PATIENT
Definition/Required Elements of Service:
Monthly Management of a Nursing Home or Home for the Aged Patient is the provision by the most
responsible physician (MRP) of routine medical care, management and supervision of a patient in a
nursing home or home for the aged for one calendar month. The service requires a minimum of two
assessments of the patient each month, where these assessments constitute services described as
"W" prefix assessments.
The requirements above are subject to the exceptions as described in payment rule #8.
[Commentary:
As with all services described as assessments, direct physical encounter with the patient is
required.]
In addition to the common elements, this service includes the provision of the following services by
any physician to the same patient during the month.
A. Services described by subsequent visits (e.g. W003, W008).
B. Services described by additional visits due to “intercurrent illness” (W121) except if the conditions
described in Payment rule #7 are satisfied.
C. Services described by palliative care subsequent visits (e.g. W872).
D. Services described by admission assessments (e.g. W102, W104, W107).
E. Services described by pre-dental/pre-operative assessments (e.g. W903).
F. Services described by periodic health visit or general re-assessments (e.g. W109, W004).
G. Services described by visit for pronouncement of death (W777) or certification of death (W771)
except if the services are performed in conjunction with a special visit.
H. Service described by anticoagulation supervision (G271).
I. Completion of CCAC application and home care supervision (K070, K071, K072).
J. Services described by the following diagnostic and therapeutic procedures – venipuncture (G489),
injection (G372, G373), immunization (G538, G590), collection of cervical cancer screening
specimen(s) (G365, G394, E430, E431), intravenous (G379), and laboratory test codes (G001,
G002, G481, G004, G005, G009, G010, G011, G012, G014).
K. All medication reviews.
L. All discussions with the staff of the institution related to the patient’s care.
M.All telephone calls from the staff of the institution, patient, patient’s relative(s) or patient’s
representative in respect of the patient between the hours of 0700 hours and 1700 hours Monday
to Friday (excluding holidays).
N. Ontario Drug Benefit Limited Use prescriptions/forms or Section 8 Ontario Drug Benefits Act
requests.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP51 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 66 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
MONTHLY MANAGEMENT OF A NURSING HOME OR HOME FOR THE AGED PATIENT
Payment rules:
1. Except as outlined in payment rule #8, this service is only eligible for payment once per patient
per calendar month.
2. This service is only eligible for payment to the MRP.
3. When W010 is rendered, none of the services listed as a component of W010 and rendered to
the patient by any physician during the month are eligible for payment.
4. In the temporary absence of the patient’s MRP (e.g. while that physician is on vacation), W010
remains payable to the patient’s MRP if the service is performed by another physician.
5. In the event the MRP renders one "W" prefix assessment in a calendar month and the same
physician has rendered W010 to that patient within the previous 11-month period, only that "W"
prefix assessment in that month is eligible for payment.
6. In the event the MRP renders two, three or four “W” prefix assessments in a calendar month
and the same physician has rendered W010 to that patient within the previous 11-month period,
only W010 is eligible for payment.
7. In the event the MRP renders more than four “W” prefix assessments to the same patient in a
month and the same physician has rendered W010 to that patient within the previous 11-month
period, any subsequent visits for intercurrent illness rendered by the MRP to the same patient in
excess of four in a month are payable as W121 in addition to payment of W010.
8. Despite the definition set out above, the requirements of W010 are met when less than two "W"
prefix assessments were rendered during the month and/or when the patient was not in the
institution for a full calendar month if:
a. a patient was newly admitted to the institution and an admission assessment was rendered;
or
b. in the event of the death of a patient while in the institution or within 48 hours of transfer to
hospital.
9. Age related premiums otherwise applicable to any component service of W010 are not eligible
for payment in addition to W010.
Claims submission instructions:
1. Claims for W010 may be submitted when the minimum required elements of the service have
been rendered for the month.
[Commentary:
a.Payment for W010 is for mangement of the patient for the entire month for all the services
listed as components of the W010 service, regardless of when the claim for W010 is
submitted.
b.When claiming W010, do not also submit claims for "W" prefix services listed as
components of the W010 for the same month.]
2. The admission date of the patient must be provided on the claim for W010 or the service is not
eligible for payment.
a. Submit claims for W121 which meet the requirements outlined in payment rule #7 using the
manual review indicator.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP52 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 67 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
[Commentary:
Examples of services not included in the Monthly Management fee include:
a.visits which qualify for a special visit premium.
b.services described under interviews, psychotherapy or counselling with the patient,
patient’s relative(s) or patient’s representative lasting 20 or more minutes and where all
other criteria for these services are met.
c.services described as physician to physician telephone consultations.
d.services rendered by a specialist who is not the MRP or who is not replacing an absent
MRP.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP53 Amd 12 Draft 1