Subsection: Supervision Of Postgraduate Medical Trainees
Parent Section: GP
Page Reference: GP79
Pages: 93 to 98
Text chunks: 1
Total text length: 13882 characters
Table indicators: {
  "multi_column": false,
  "has_h_p_columns": false,
  "has_asst_surg_anae": false,
  "has_time_requirements": false,
  "has_fee_amounts": false,
  "table_sections": []
}
============================================================

--- PAGE 93 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SUPERVISION OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL TRAINEES
[Commentary:
1.A physician who supervises a medical trainee who renders an insured service is eligible to
be paid for the insured service as if the supervising physician performed the service
personally, subject to any terms, conditions and limitations found in this section.
2.The sole purpose of the terms and conditions described in this section is to define when a
service is payable by OHIP. These terms and conditions do not alter the College of
Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario Professional Responsibilities in Postgraduate Medical
Education requirements or any requirements of the institutions responsible for postgraduate
medical education.]
Note:
Unless otherwise specified in this section, all other payment requirements in the Schedule
related to any service that is performed by a Medical Trainee are applicable.
DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this section of the Schedule only, the following Definitions apply:
Supervision: Supervision is performed by the Supervising Physician and includes the
responsibility to guide, observe and assess the educational activities of
the Medical Trainee and assures the quality of an insured service while
being rendered by the Medical Trainee.
Supervision is only performed:
a. in person, by telephone, or videoconference, the method being consistent with the acuity of
the service being rendered by the Medical Trainee as well as the Medical Trainee’s level of
competence;
b. when the service is provided within a setting approved by the educational institution where
the Medical Trainee is registered; and
c. when the service is within the scope and oversight of the postgraduate medical training
program in which the Medical Trainee is registered.
[Commentary:
The Supervising Physician and the Medical Trainee must be physically present in Ontario.]
Supervising The Supervising Physician is a physician who performs Supervision of a
Physician Medical Trainee who renders an insured service to an insured person.
The Supervising Physician must hold an academic appointment with the
educational institution where the Medical Trainee is registered. The
Supervising Physician of a Medical Trainee involved in the care of a
patient may or may not be the most responsible physician for that
patient.
Medical Trainee A Medical Trainee is a physician who is registered in a postgraduate
training program as a Resident or Clinical Fellow at the time he/she
performs an insured service.
Resident A Resident is registered in an accredited postgraduate training program
that leads to certification for practice in Canada as a specialist or
subspecialist by the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Canada or to certification by the College of Family Physicians of Canada
for practice in Canada as a family physician.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP79 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 94 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SUPERVISION OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL TRAINEES
Clinical Fellow A Clinical Fellow is registered with a postgraduate training program that
is approved by a university postgraduate medical education office in
Ontario. The Clinical Fellow must have a Certificate of Registration with
the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario.
[Commentary:
An undergraduate is not a physician and does not meet the definition of a Medical Trainee]
Procedure A Procedure is an insured service that has anaesthesia base units listed
in the column headed with “Anae” and includes anaesthesia services
provided by Anaesthesiologists.
Non-Procedure A Non-Procedure Service is an insured service, other than Procedures
and Time-Based Services.
Time-Based A Time-Based Service is an insured service described as
Services Psychotherapy, Psychiatric and Counselling, Interviews, Hypnotherapy,
Psychiatric Care and Primary Mental Health Care.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP80 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 95 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SUPERVISION OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL TRAINEES
Payment Rules
A. GENERAL
1. A service rendered by a Medical Trainee is only eligible for payment to the Supervising
Physician where Supervision is provided as defined above and subject to the specific
requirements below.
2. Where a Resident with an OHIP billing number is providing insured services independently and
outside their training program, the insured service is not eligible for payment to a Supervising
Physician as there is no Supervision provided.
[Commentary:
In the scenario described above the Resident is not performing the service as a Medical
Trainee. In this scenario, the Resident would bill OHIP for the service provided.]
3. Where a Clinical Fellow with an OHIP billing number is providing insured services
independently and outside their training program, the insured service is not eligible for payment
to a Supervising Physician as there is no Supervision provided.
[Commentary:
In the scenario described above the Clinical Fellow is not performing the services as a Medical
Trainee. In this scenario, the Clinical Fellow would bill OHIP for the services provided. For
example, an orthopedic surgeon may be enrolled in a sarcoma surgery clinical fellowship but
has privileges as a general orthopedic surgeon and may perform, and be eligible for payment,
for rendering a service such as an open reduction of a fracture that is not being supervised by
a Supervising Physician.]
4. Special Visit premiums are not eligible for payment to the Supervising Physician unless the
Supervising Physician personally satisfies the payment requirements for a special visit
premium.
5. The following services are not eligible for payment to the Supervising Physician when rendered
by a Medical Trainee:
a. Case Conferences;
b. Multidisciplinary Cancer Conferences;
c. Provider-to-provider services, including:
i. Telephone Consultations;
ii. E-Consultations; and
iii. E-Assessments.
d. Virtual Care Services when provided to hospital inpatients or patients in an emergency
department.
B. PROCEDURE SERVICES
1. A Procedure rendered by a Resident is only eligible for payment to the Supervising Physician
when the Supervising Physician:
a. is aware the Resident will render the service; and
b. is physically present in the clinical facility at the time the service is rendered; and
c. is immediately available to personally attend the patient when requested by the Resident or
other health care professional.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP81 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 96 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SUPERVISION OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL TRAINEES
2. A Procedure rendered by a Clinical Fellow is only eligible for payment to the Supervising
Physician when the Supervising Physician:
a. is aware the Clinical Fellow will render the service; and
b. is available to personally attend the patient when requested by the Clinical Fellow or other
health care professional in a timely manner consistent with the acuity of the clinical
scenario.
Note:
Payment rule 2(b) above is not applicable in circumstances where a Supervising Physician
supervises Procedures rendered by a Clinical Fellow for the purpose of procurement of organs
or tissues to be used in transplantation.
3. Where a Procedure is rendered by a Clinical Fellow with an OHIP billing number under the
supervision of a Supervising Physician, the Procedure is eligible for payment to the Clinical
Fellow as a surgical assistant if the Procedure has basic units listed in the column headed with
“Asst”.
[Commentary:
1.The Supervising Physician should submit a claim as the operating surgeon in this situation
(“A” suffix).
2.The Clinical Fellow should submit a claim as the assistant (“B” suffix).]
C. TIME-BASED SERVICES
1. A Time-Based Service rendered by a Medical Trainee is only eligible for payment to the
Supervising Physician when the Supervising Physician is aware the Medical Trainee will render
the service.
2. The number of time units payable is the time spent by the Medical Trainee providing the service
to the patient subject to limits set out below:
Note:
1.Any time taken in discussion with the Medical Trainee about the case is not eligible for
payment.
2.The maximum number of time units payable for a Time-Based service rendered by the
Medical Trainee(s) to an individual patient is two units.
3.The maximum number of time units payable for a Time-Based service rendered by the
Medical Trainee(s) to a group of two or more patients is four units.
[Commentary:
1.Where there is more than one Medical Trainee participating in the rendering of a time-based
service concurrently, only the time units rendered by one Medical Trainee are eligible for
payment to the same Supervising Physician.]
D. NUMBER OF MEDICAL TRAINEES
The following table describes the maximum number of services that are payable for services rendered
concurrently by Medical Trainee(s) and the Supervising Physician.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP82 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 97 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SUPERVISION OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL TRAINEES
Maximum number of insured
Location Where services eligible for payment
Type of Insured Service Insured Services when rendered concurrently
are Rendered by the Medical Trainee(s) and
the Supervising Physician
Procedures Only Any 2
Procedures with any Any 2
combination of Non-
Procedures or Time-
Based Services
Any Combination of Non- Any 3
Procedures or Time-
Based Services
Any Combination of Non- Specialized Clinic 4
Procedures or Time- in a Quaternary
Based Services Hospital
Any Combination of Non- Emergency No Limit
Procedures or Time- Department
Based Services
Any Combination of Non- Hospital Inpatient No Limit
Procedures or Time-
Based Services
Note:
1.Maximum number of services rendered concurrently include all services rendered by both
the Medical Trainee(s) and the Supervising Physician.
2.With respect to the maximum number of services eligible for payment in Specialized Clinics
located at a Quaternary hospital, the following is applicable:
a.The maximums are applicable only for clinics that have been approved by the MOH.
b.In the absence of MOH approval, the other maximums pertaining to the type and location
of insured services rendered by the Supervising Physician and Medical Trainee(s) are
applicable.
3.The above maximums refer to Time-Based Services rendered to individual patients. In
circumstances where Time-Based Services are rendered to groups of two or more patients,
the group session is considered to be a service provided to one patient.
[Commentary:
1.If the Supervising Physician is personally performing a Procedure at the same time and is
Supervising one Medical Trainee who is performing a Procedure, this situation describes two
insured services that are payable.
2.If the Supervising Physician is personally performing a Procedure and at the same time is
Supervising two Medical Trainees who are both performing Procedures, this situation
describes three services but only two of the three insured services are payable.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP83 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 98 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SUPERVISION OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL TRAINEES
3.If the Supervising Physician is personally rendering a service other than a Procedure (i.e. a
Non-Procedure or a Time-Based Service) and is supervising two Medical Trainees who are
performing Procedures concurrently, this situation describes three services but only two
insured services that are payable.
4.If the Supervising Physician is personally rendering a Non-Procedure and is Supervising two
Medical Trainees who are both performing Non-Procedures or Time-Based services at the
same time, this situation describes three insured services that are payable.]
E. Forms
1. An insured service listed in the Schedule that includes the completion of a form is not eligible for
payment to a Supervising Physician if rendered by a Medical Trainee unless the form has been
reviewed and signed by the Supervising Physician.
F. Medical Record Requirements
1. A service is only eligible for payment to the Supervising Physician when the medical record of
the patient(s) identifies the following information at the time of the provision of the service:
a. The Supervising Physician;
b. The Medical Trainee and level of training;
c. The description of the insured service performed by the Medical Trainee;
d. Patient consent to the Supervision of services of a Medical Trainee; and
e. Where the service rendered is a Time-Based service, the Supervising Physician has at a
minimum, reviewed the nature and outcome of the service and the patient record(s), with the
Medical Trainee.
2. In addition to the requirements in 1 above, the Supervising Physician must have:
a. signed off on the service rendered by the Medical Trainee in the patient’s medical record; or
b. where the Supervising Physician was not immediately available to sign off on the service
rendered by the Medical Trainee, the Medical Trainee has written the date and time a
discussion occurred with the Supervising Physician regarding the provision of the service in
the patient’s medical record.
[Commentary:
Each entry into the patient’s medical record does not need to contain all of the above medical
record keeping requirements. However, it must be evident upon review of the entire medical
record that all requirements were met at the time of the provision of the Supervised service.
Supervision of the Medical Trainee by the Supervising Physician must be evident in the
medical record. This may include a physical visit to the patient and/or a chart review and
detailed discussion between the Supervising Physician, the Medical Trainee, and other
member(s) of the health team.
The service date to be used for claims is the date the Medical Trainee rendered the insured
service to the patient.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP84 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)