Section: B - Positron Emission Tomography (PET)
Pages: 29 to 59
Extracted text length: 60551 characters
============================================================

--- PAGE 29 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIFIC ELEMENTS OF ASSESSMENTS
In addition to the common elements, all services which are described as assessments, or as including
assessments (e.g. consultations), include the following specific elements:
A. A direct physical encounter with the patient including taking a patient history and performing a
physical examination.
B. Other inquiry (including taking a patient history), carried out to arrive at an opinion as to the nature
of the patient’s condition, (whether such inquiry takes place before, during or after the encounter
during which the physical examination takes place) and/or follow-up care.
C. Performing any procedure(s) during the same encounter as the physical examination, unless the
procedure(s) is(are) separately listed in the Schedule and an amount is payable for the procedure
in conjunction with an assessment.
“Procedure” in this context includes obtaining specimens, preparation of the patient, interpretation
of results and, unless otherwise specified, all diagnostic (including laboratory) and therapeutic
(including surgical) services;
D. Making arrangements for any related assessments, procedures or therapy, and/or interpreting
results.
E. Making arrangements for follow-up care.
F. Discussion with, and providing advice and information, including prescribing therapy to the patient
or the patient’s representative, whether by telephone or otherwise, on matters related to:
1. the service; and
2. in circumstances in which it would be professionally appropriate that results can be reported
upon prior to any further patient visit, the results of related procedure(s) and/or assessment(s).
G. When medically indicated, monitoring the condition of the patient and intervening, until the next
insured service is provided.
H. Providing premises, equipment, supplies, and personnel for the specific elements of the service
except for any aspect(s) that is (are) performed in a hospital or nursing home.
While no occasion may arise for performing elements C, D, E, G, or H, when performed in connection
with the other specific elements, they are included in the assessment.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP15 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 30 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
CONSULTATIONS
CONSULTATION
Definition/Required elements of service:
A consultation is an assessment rendered following a written request from a referring:
1. physician
2. nurse practitioner or
3. dental surgeon in connection with an insured dental procedure rendered in a hospital,
who, in light of his/her professional knowledge of the patient, requests the opinion of a physician (the
“consultant physician”) competent to give advice in this field because of the complexity, seriousness,
or obscurity of the case, or because another opinion is requested by the patient or patient’s
representative.
[Commentary:
1.The referring physician, nurse practitioner or dental surgeon must determine if multiple
requests by a patient or the patient’s representative to different physicians in the same
specialty for the same condition are medically necessary. Services that are not medically
necessary are uninsured.
2.If the physician rendering the service requests a referring physician, nurse practitioner or
dental surgeon to submit a consultation request for that service after the service has been
provided, a consultation is not payable. The visit fee appropriate to the service rendered may
be claimed.
3. Where a physician who has been paid for a consultation for the patient for the same
diagnosis makes a request for a referral for ongoing management of the patient, the service
rendered following the referral is not payable as a consultation, except as outlined in the
Virtual Care Services section under definitions, part 3, commentary 3]
A consultation includes the services necessary to enable the consultant to prepare a written report
(including findings, opinions, and recommendations) to the referring physician, nurse practitioner or
dental surgeon. Where the referral is made by a nurse practitioner, the consultant shall provide the
report to the nurse practitioner and the patient’s primary care provider, if applicable. Except where
otherwise specified, the consultant is required to perform a general, specific or medical specific
assessment, including a review of all relevant data.
The following are additional requirements for a consultation:
a. A copy of the written request for the consultation, signed by the referring physician, nurse
practitioner or dental surgeon must be kept in the consulting physician’s medical record,
except in the case of a consultation which occurs in a hospital, long-term care institution or
multi-specialty clinic where common medical records are maintained. In such cases, the
written request may be contained on the common medical record.
b. The request identifies the consultant by name, the referring physician, nurse practitioner or
dental surgeon by name and billing number, and identifies the patient by name and health
number.
c. The written request sets out the information relevant to the referral and specifies the
service(s) required.
In the event these requirements are not met, the amount payable for a consultation will be reduced to
a lesser assessment fee.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP16 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 31 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSULTATIONS
[Commentary:
The request would ordinarily also include appropriate clinical information, such as the reason
for the referral for consultation, present and past history, physical findings and relevant test
results and reports.]
Payment rules:
1. Consultations rendered to the same patient by the same physician for the same diagnosis are
limited to one service per two consecutive 12 month periods except:
a. When the additional consultation service(s) is a repeat consultation;
b. When a consultant has rendered a consultation service to a patient in any location and the
same consultant is referred to the same patient a second time with the same diagnosis, then
the number of consultations eligible for payment is a total of two services per two
consecutive 12 month periods only when:
i. the second consultation is rendered for a hospital inpatient or a patient in an Emergency
Department; and
ii. the consultation is rendered more than 12 months but less than 24 months following the
first consultation.
See the Table below.
Limits on Consultation Services Rendered for the Same
Problem Within Two Consecutive 12 Month Periods
Total consultation
services eligible for
Patient location where
payment in two
consultation rendered
consecutive 12 month
periods
Services
Services
rendered
Second rendered
First consultation between 12
consultation within first
and 24
12 months
months
All locations Hospital One service One service
Inpatient or
Emergency
Department
All locations All locations One service
except
hospital
inpatient or
Emergency
Department
2. Consultations rendered to the same patient by the same consultant with a clearly defined
unrelated diagnosis are limited to one service every 12 months.
3. The amount payable for consultations will be adjusted to the amount payable for a general or
specific assessment, depending upon the specialty of the consultant where:
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP17 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 32 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSULTATIONS
a. consultations are in excess of the above limits;
b. the payment requirements of a repeat consultation are not met; or
c. the consultation is requested by a Medical Trainee.
Note:
1.The above limits are applicable to all consultations, including time-based and age-specific
consultation services (e.g. special, extended and comprehensive consultations) but not
repeat consultations.
2.In the preoperative preparation of a patient undergoing the following low risk elective surgical
procedures under local anaesthesia and/or I.V. sedation, a preoperative consultation by any
physician is only eligible for payment where the medical record demonstrates the
consultation is medically necessary.
a.cataract surgery;
b.colonoscopy;
c.cystoscopy;
d.carpal tunnel surgery; or
e.arthroscopic surgery.
[Commentary:
Such medically necessary consultations would be very uncommon.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP18 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 33 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
CONSULTATIONS
REPEAT CONSULTATION
Definition/Required elements of service:
A repeat consultation is an additional consultation rendered by the same consultant, in respect of the
same presenting problem, following care rendered to the patient by another physician in the interval
following the initial consultation but preceding the repeat consultation.
A repeat consultation has the same requirements as a consultation including the requirement for a
new written request by the referring physician, nurse practitioner or dental surgeon.
LIMITED CONSULTATION
Definition/Required elements of service:
A limited consultation is a consultation which is less demanding and, in terms of time, normally
requires substantially less of the physician’s time than the full consultation. Otherwise, a limited
consultation has the same requirements as a full consultation.
Under the heading of “Family Practice & Practice in General", a limited consultation is the service
rendered by any physician who is not a specialist, where the service meets all the requirements for a
consultation but, because of the nature of the referral, only those services which constitute a specific
assessment are rendered.
EMERGENCY ROOM (ER) PHYSICIAN CONSULTATION
Payment rules:
1. The amount payable for a consultation by an ER Physician will be adjusted to a lesser
assessment fee under either of the following circumstances:
a. the patient is referred by another ER physician in the same hospital; or
b. the service is rendered in any location other than the emergency department or other critical
care area in a hospital, or to a critically ill patient in a hospital.
2. ER reports constitute adequate documentation of the written report of the consultation as long
as the rendering of all constituent elements is clearly documented on all copies of the report. If
the consulting physician fails to ensure that a copy of the ER report is sent to the physician or
nurse practitioner who referred the patient, the amount payable for the service will be adjusted
to the amount payable for an assessment.
Claims submission instruction:
Claims for ER Physician consultations are to be submitted using H055 for a specialist in emergency
medicine (FRCP) and H065 for all other physicians.
SPECIAL SURGICAL CONSULTATION
Definition/Required elements of service:
A special surgical consultation is rendered when a surgeon provides all the appropriate elements of a
regular consultation and is required to devote at least fifty minutes exclusively to the consultation with
the patient.
[Commentary:
The calculation of the 50 minute minimum excludes time devoted to any other service or
procedure for which an amount is payable in addition to the consultation.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP19 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 34 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSULTATIONS
Claims submission instruction:
Claims for special surgical consultations are to be submitted using either A935 or C935, as applicable.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP20 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 35 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
ASSESSMENTS
Specific requirements for assessments listed in the “Consultations and Visits” section of the Schedule
are set out below:
GENERAL ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A general assessment is a service, rendered at a place other than in a patient’s home that requires a
full history (the elements of which must include a history of the presenting complaint, family medical
history, past medical history, social history, and a functional inquiry into all body parts and systems),
and, except for breast, genital or rectal examination where not medically indicated or refused, an
examination of all body parts and systems, and may include a detailed examination of one or more
parts or systems.
Payment rules:
General assessments are limited to one per patient per physician per 12 month period unless either of
the following circumstances is met in which case the limit is increased to two per 12 month period:
1. the patient presents a second time with a complaint for which the diagnosis is clearly different
and unrelated to the diagnosis made at the time of the first general assessment; or
2. at least 90 days have elapsed since the date of the last general assessment and the second
assessment is a hospital admission assessment.
The amount payable for general assessments in excess of these limits will be adjusted to a lesser
assessment fee.
PERIODIC HEALTH VISIT
Definition: A periodic health visit (including a primary or secondary school examination) is performed
on a patient, after their second birthday, who presents and reveals no apparent acute physical or
mental illness. The service must include an intermediate assessment, a level 2 paediatric assessment
or a partial assessment focusing on age and gender appropriate history, physical examination, health
screening and relevant counselling.
Payment rules:
Periodic health visit is limited to one per patient per 12 month period per physician.
[Commentary:
Periodic health visits in excess of the limit are not insured.]
Claims submission instruction:
Submit claims for periodic health visits using the fee codes listed below.
No diagnostic code is required unless otherwise specifically listed.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP21 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 36 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Family Practice & Practice in General
Code Description
K017 child
K130 adolescent
K131 adult age 18 to 64 inclusive
K132 adult 65 years of age and older
K133 adult with Intellectual and Developmental
Disability (IDD)
Paediatrics
Code Description
K269 12 to 17 years
K267 2 to 11 years
GENERAL RE-ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A general re-assessment includes all the services listed for a general assessment, with the exception
of the patient’s history, which need not include all the details already obtained in the original
assessment.
Payment rules:
With the exception of general re-assessments rendered for hospital admissions, general re-
assessments are limited to two per 12 month period, per patient per physician. The amount payable
for general re-assessments in excess of this limit will be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP22 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 37 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
ASSESSMENTS
PRE-DENTAL/PRE-OPERATIVE ASSESSMENTS
[Commentary:
For Definition and terms and conditions see page A4.]
SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT AND MEDICAL SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
Specific assessment and medical specific assessment are services rendered by specialists, in a place
other than a patient’s home, and require a full history of the presenting complaint and detailed
examination of the affected part(s), region(s), or system(s) needed to make a diagnosis, and/or
exclude disease, and/or assess function.
Payment rules:
Specific assessments or medical specific assessments are limited to one per patient per physician per
12 month period unless either of the following circumstances are met in which case the limit is
increased to two per patient per physician per 12 month period:
1. the patient presents a second time with a complaint for which a clearly different diagnosis is
made, unrelated to the diagnosis made at the time of the first specific assessment in that 12
month period; or
2. in the case of a medical specific assessment, at least 90 days have elapsed since the date of
the last specific assessment and the second assessment is a hospital admission assessment.
The amount payable for specific or medical specific assessments in excess of this limit will be
adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
In addition, any combination of medical specific assessments and complex medical specific re-
assessments (see below) are limited to 4 per patient per physician per 12 month period. The amount
payable for these services in excess of this limit will be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
SPECIFIC RE-ASSESSMENT AND MEDICAL SPECIFIC RE-ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
Specific re-assessment and medical specific re-assessment are services rendered by specialists and
require a full, relevant history and physical examination of one or more systems.
[Commentary:
As outlined on page GP40, admission assessments are deemed to be a specific re-
assessment or medical specific re-assessment under either of the following circumstances:
1.for those procedures prefixed with a “Z” or noted as an IOP, by a surgical specialist who has
assessed the patient prior to admission in respect of the same illness; or
2.for those patients who have been assessed by a physician and subsequently admitted to the
hospital for the same illness by the same physician.]
Payment rules:
Specific re-assessments or medical specific re-assessments are limited to two per patient per
physician per consecutive 12 month period except for specific re-assessments rendered for hospital
admissions. The amount payable for specific or medical specific re-assessments in excess of this limit
will be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP23 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 38 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
COMPLEX MEDICAL SPECIFIC RE-ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
A complex medical specific re-assessment is a re-assessment of a patient because of the complexity,
obscurity, or seriousness of the patient’s condition and includes all the requirements of a medical
specific re-assessment. The physician must report his/her findings, opinions, or recommendations in
writing to the patient’s primary care physician or the amount payable for the service will be adjusted to
a lesser assessment fee.
Payment rules:
Complex medical specific re-assessments are limited to 4 per patient per physician per 12 month
period. The amount payable for complex medical specific re-assessments in excess of this limit will be
adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
In addition, any combination of medical specific assessments and complex medical specific re-
assessments are limited to 4 per patient per physician per 12 month period. The amount payable for
these services in excess of this limit will be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP24 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 39 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
PARTIAL ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
A partial assessment is the limited service that constitutes a history of the presenting complaint, the
necessary physical examination, advice to the patient and appropriate record.
Chronic Disease Assessment Premium
Definition/ Required elements of service:
Chronic disease assessment premium is payable in addition to the amount payable for an
assessment when all of the following criteria are met:
a. The assessment is a
i. medical specific assessment;
ii. medical specific re-assessment;
iii. complex medical specific re-assessment;
iv. partial assessment; or
v. level 2 paediatric assessment
b. The service is rendered by a physician registered with OHIP as having one of the following
specialty designations:
07(Geriatrics), 15(Endocrinology & Metabolism), 18(Neurology), 26(Paediatrics),
28(Pathology), 31(Physical Medicine), 34(Therapeutic Radiology), 44(Medical Oncology),
46(Infectious Disease), 47(Respiratory Disease), 48(Rheumatology), 61(Haematology),
62(Clinical Immunology).
c. The assessment is rendered in an office setting or an out-patient clinic located in a hospital,
other than an emergency department.
[Commentary:
The chronic disease assessment premium is not payable for assessments rendered to in-
patients of any hospital, patients seen in a long-term care facility or patients seen in an
emergency department.]
d. The patient has an established diagnosis of a chronic disease, documented in the patient’s
medical record.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP25 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 40 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Payment rules:
The following is a list of the diagnostic codes as specified by OHIP that must accompany the claim for
payment purposes:
Diagnostic
Description
Code
042 AIDS
043 AIDS-related complex
044 Other human immunodeficiency virus infection
250 Diabetes mellitus, including complications
286 Coagulation defects (e.g. haemophilia, other factor deficiencies)
282 Hereditary hemolytic anemia (e.g., thalassemia, sickle-cell anemia)
287 Purpura, thrombocytopenia, other haemorrhagic conditions
290 Senile dementia, presenile dementia
299 Child psychoses or autism
313 Behavioural disorders of childhood and adolescence
315 Specified delays in development (e.g. dyslexia, dyslalia, motor retardation)
332 Parkinson's Disease
340 Multiple Sclerosis
343 Cerebral Palsy
345 Epilepsy
402 Hypertensive Heart Disease
428 Congestive Heart Failure
491 Chronic Bronchitis
492 Emphysema
493 Asthma, Allergic Bronchitis
515 Pulmonary Fibrosis
555 Regional Enteritis, Crohn's Disease
556 Ulcerative Colitis
571 Cirrhosis of the Liver
585 Chronic Renal Failure, Uremia
710 Disseminated Lupus Erythaematosus, Generalized Scleroderma, Dermatomyositis
714 Rheumatoid Arthritis, Still's Disease
720 Ankylosing Spondylitis
721 Other seronegative spondyloarthropathies
758 Chromosomal Anomalies
765 Prematurity, low-birthweight infant
902 Educational problems
[Commentary:
The chronic disease assessment premium is not payable in situations where the diagnosis has
not been established.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP26 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 41 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
LEVEL 1 PAEDIATRIC ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A Level 1 paediatric assessment includes one or both of the following:
a. a brief history and examination of the affected part or region or related to a mental or
emotional disorder; or
b. brief advice or information regarding health maintenance, diagnosis, treatment and/or
prognosis.
LEVEL 2 PAEDIATRIC ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A Level 2 paediatric assessment is a paediatric service that requires a more extensive examination
than a level 1 paediatric assessment. It requires a history of the presenting complaint(s), inquiry
concerning, and examination of the affected part(s), region(s), system(s), or mental or emotional
disorder as needed to make a diagnosis, exclude disease, and/or assess function.
A Level 2 paediatric assessment also includes well baby care, which is a periodic assessment of a
well newborn/infant during the first two years of life including complete examination with weight and
measurements, and instructions to the parent(s) or patient’s representative regarding health care.
INTERMEDIATE ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
An intermediate assessment is a primary care general practice service that requires a more extensive
examination than a minor assessment. It requires a history of the presenting complaint(s), inquiry
concerning, and examination of the affected part(s), region(s), system(s), or mental or emotional
disorder as needed to make a diagnosis, exclude disease, and/or assess function.
INTERMEDIATE ASSESSMENT – PRONOUNCEMENT OF DEATH
Definition/Required elements of service:
Intermediate assessment – pronouncement of death is the service of pronouncing a patient dead in a
location other than in the patient’s home. This service may include any counselling of relatives that is
rendered during the same visit, and completion of the death certificate.
[Commentary:
1.For pronouncement of death in the home, see house call assessments (page A4 of the
Schedule).
2.Submit the claim for this service using the diagnostic code for the underlying cause of death,
as recorded on the death certificate, rather than the immediate cause of death.]
MINOR ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A minor assessment includes one or both of the following:
a. a brief history and examination of the affected part or region or related to a mental or
emotional disorder; or
b. brief advice or information regarding health maintenance, diagnosis, treatment and/or
prognosis.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP27 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 42 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
PERIODIC OCULO-VISUAL ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A periodic oculo-visual assessment is an examination of the eye and vision system rendered primarily
to determine if a patient has a simple refractive error (defined as myopia, hypermetropia, presbyopia,
anisometropia or astigmatism) for patients aged 19 or less or aged 65 or more. This service includes
all components required to perform the assessment (ordinarily a history of the presenting complaint,
past medical history, visual acuity examination, ocular mobility examination, slit lamp examination of
the anterior segment, ophthalmoscopy, tonometry) advice and/or instruction to the patient and
provision of a written refractive prescription if required.
Payment rules:
1. This service is limited to one per patient per 12 month period regardless of whether the first
claim is or has been submitted for a service rendered by an optometrist or physician. Services
in excess of this limit or to patients aged 20 to 64 are not insured services.
2. Any other insured service rendered by the same physician (other than an ophthalmologist) to
the same patient the same day as a periodic oculo-visual assessment is not eligible for
payment.
[Commentary:
1.Other consultation and visit codes are not to be used as a substitute for this service when the
limit is reached.
2.Re-assessment following a periodic oculo-visual assessment is to be claimed using a lesser
assessment fee code and diagnostic code 367.]
FIRST VISIT BY PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIAN AFTER HOSPITAL DISCHARGE
E080 First visit after hospital discharge premium, to other service
listed in payment rule 5 below ..................................... add 25.25
Payment rules:
1.Subject to payment rules 2 through 5, E080 is only eligible for payment for a visit with the
patient's primary care physician in the physician’s office or the patient’s home within two
weeks of discharge following in-patient admission to an acute care hospital.
[Commentary:
This premium is not payable for visits rendered to patients in locations other than the
physician's office or patient's home. As such, the premium is not payable for services rendered
in places such as Nursing Homes, Homes for the Aged, chronic care hospitals, etc.]
2.E080 is not eligible for payment if the admission to hospital was for the purpose of obstetrical
delivery unless the mother required admission to an ICU during the hospital stay.
3.E080 is not eligible for payment if the admission to hospital was for the purpose of newborn
care unless the infant required admission to a NICU during the hospital stay.
4.E080 is not eligible for payment if the admission to hospital was for the purpose of performing
day surgery.
5.E080 is only eligible for payment when rendered with the following services:
A001, A003, A004, A007, A008, A261, A262, A263, A264, A888, A900, K004–K008, K013,
K014, K022, K023, K028-K030, K032, K033, K037, K623, P003, P004, P008.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP28 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 43 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
DETENTION
Definition/Required elements of service:
Detention is payable following another insured service when a physician is required to spend
considerable extra time in active treatment and/or monitoring of the patient to the exclusion of all other
work and in this section is based on full 15-minute time units. The specific elements are those for
assessments.
K001 Detention – per full quarter hour............................................. 21.10
Payment rules:
1. Detention is payable under the following circumstances:
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP29 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 44 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Minimum time required in
Service delivery of service before
detention is payable
minor, partial, multiple systems assessment, level 1 and level 2 30 minutes
paediatric assessment, intermediate assessment, focused practice
assessment or subsequent hospital visit
specific or general re-assessment 40 minutes
consultation, repeat consultation, specific or general assessment, 60 minutes
complex dermatology assessment, complex endocrine neoplastic
disease assessment, complex neuromuscular assessment,
complex physiatry assessment, complex respiratory assessment,
enhanced 18 month well baby visit, midwife or aboriginal midwife-
requested anaesthesia assessment, midwife or aboriginal midwife-
requested assessment, midwife or aboriginal midwife-requested
genetic assessment or optometrist-requested assessment
initial assessment-substance abuse, special community medicine 90 minutes
consultation, special family and general practice consultation,
special optometrist-requested assessment, special palliative care
consultation, special surgical consultation or midwife or aboriginal
midwife-requested special assessment
comprehensive cardiology consultation, comprehensive community 120 minutes
medicine consultation, comprehensive endocrinology consultation,
comprehensive family and general practice consultation,
comprehensive geriatric consultation, comprehensive infectious
disease consultation, comprehensive internal medicine
consultation, comprehensive midwife or aboriginal midwife-
requested genetic assessment, comprehensive nephrology
consultation, comprehensive respiratory disease consultation,
comprehensive physical medicine and rehabilitation consultation,
comprehensive rheumatology consultation, special paediatric
consultation, special genetic consultation or special neurology
consultation
extended comprehensive geriatric consultation, extended midwife 180 minutes
or aboriginal midwife-requested genetic assessment, extended
special genetic consultation, extended special paediatric
consultation, or paediatric neurodevelopmental consultation
2. Detention is not eligible for payment in conjunction with diagnostic procedures, obstetrics, and
those therapeutic procedures where the fee includes an assessment (e.g. non-IOP surgery).
3. Detention is not eligible for payment for time spent waiting.
4. For the purposes of calculation of time units payable for detention, the start time commences
after the minimum time required for the assessment or consultation listed in the table has
passed.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP30 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 45 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
5. K001 is not eligible for payment for same patient same day as A190, A191, A192 A195, A197,
A198, A695, A795 or A895.
Claims submission instructions:
Claims for detention are assessed by a medical consultant on an IC basis and require the
submission of a written explanation.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP31 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 46 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
DETENTION-IN-AMBULANCE
Definition/Required elements of service:
Detention-in-Ambulance is payable for constant attendance with a patient in an ambulance, to provide
all aspects of care to the patient. Time is calculated only for that period during which the physician is
in constant attendance with the patient in the ambulance. The service includes an initial examination
and ongoing monitoring of the patient’s condition and all interventions, except in those circumstances
in which the Schedule provides for separate or additional payment for the intervention.
K101 Ground ambulance transfer with patient per quarter hour or
part thereof ......................................................................... 42.10
K111 Air ambulance transfer with patient per quarter hour or part
thereof ................................................................................ 126.40
K112 Return trip without patient to place of origin following air or
ground ambulance transfer, per half hour or major part
thereof ................................................................................ 25.05
Claims submission instruction:
Claims for Detention-in-Ambulance are assessed by a medical consultant on an IC basis and require
the submission of a written explanation.
[Commentary:
K101 is not applicable to attendance in a vehicle other than an ambulance, in which case K001
may apply.]
DETENTION FOR THE TRANSPORT OF DONOR ORGANS
Definition/Required elements of service:
Detention for the Transport of Donor Organs is payable for time travelling to and from a donor centre
(excluding time spent in the donor centre) for the purpose of collecting and transporting to the
recipient hospital (a) donor organ(s), including fresh bone being harvested.
K102 Per quarter hour or part thereof (not eligible for payment with
K001).................................................................................. 20.20
Claims submission instruction:
Claims for Detention for the Transport of Donor Organs are assessed by a medical consultant on an
IC basis and require the submission of a written explanation.
[Commentary:
Claims will be adjudicated on the basis of the most time-efficient means of travel to and from a
donor centre.]
NEWBORN CARE
Definition/Required elements of service:
Newborn care is the routine care of a well newborn for up to the first ten days of life in hospital or
home and includes an initial general assessment and subsequent assessments, as may be indicated,
and instructions to the caregiver(s) regarding the newborn's health care.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP32 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 47 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Payment rules:
1. Newborn care is limited to a maximum of one per patient except when a well baby is transferred
to another hospital in which case the fee for newborn care may be payable to a physician at
both hospitals.
[Commentary:
An example where this is possible is if the transfer occurred because of the state of health of
the mother.]
2. Despite the requirement that to be eligible for a special visit premium the call be non-elective
(see GP65), a special visit premium is payable in addition to this service if a physician is
required to make an additional visit to the hospital outside of his or her normally scheduled
hospital rounds to facilitate discharge of the newborn the same day as the visit.
LOW BIRTH WEIGHT BABY CARE
Definition:
Low birth weight baby care is any assessment of a well newborn/infant weighing less than 2.5
kilograms at birth.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP33 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 48 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
WELL BABY CARE
Definition/Required elements of service:
Well baby care is a periodic assessment of a well newborn/infant during the first two years of life
including complete examination with weight and measurements, and instructions to the parent(s) or
patient’s representative regarding health care.
ENHANCED 18 MONTH WELL BABY VISIT
Definition/Required elements of service:
Enhanced 18 month well baby visit is the service rendered when a physician performs all of the
following in respect of a child from 17-24 months of age:
a. Those services defined as “well baby care”;
b. An 18 month age-appropriate developmental screen; and
c. Review with the patient’s parent/guardian, legal representative or other caregiver of a brief
standardized tool (completed by the patient’s parent/guardian, legal representative or other
caregiver) that aids the identification of children at risk of a developmental disorder.
Medical record requirements:
This service is eligible for payment only when, in addition to the medical record requirements
for well baby care, an 18 month age-appropriate developmental screen and concerns identified
from the review of the brief standardized tool with the parent/guardian, legal representative or
other caregiver are recorded in the patient’s permanent medical record.
[Commentary:
An example of an 18 month age-appropriate developmental screen would be that outlined in
the Rourke Baby Record and an example of a brief standardized tool completed by the parent/
guardian, legal representative or other caregiver that aids the identification of children at risk of
a developmental disorder would be the Nipissing District Developmental Screen or similar
parental questionnaire.]
PSYCHIATRIC ASSESSMENT UNDER THE MENTAL HEALTH ACT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A psychiatric assessment under the Mental Health Act (K620, K623, K624, and K629) includes such
psychiatric history, inquiry, and examination of the patient, as is appropriate, to enable the physician to
complete, and includes completing, the relevant forms and to notify the patient, family, patient
representative and relevant authorities under the Mental Health Act, where appropriate.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP34 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 49 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
E-Assessments
Definition/Required elements of service:
An e-assessment is a service performed by a specialist when a primary care physician or nurse
practitioner requests an opinion and/or recommendations from the specialist for management of a
specific patient by providing information electronically through a secure server (e.g. secure
messaging, EMR). The specialist is required to review all relevant data provided by the primary care
physician or nurse practitioner, including the review of any additional information that may be
submitted subsequent to the initial request. For the purpose of this service, “relevant data” may
include family/patient history, history of the presenting complaint, laboratory and diagnostic tests, and
visual images where indicated.
In addition to the Common Elements, E-assessments include the specific elements of assessments,
as listed in the General Preamble, except for paragraphs A and B.
Payment rules:
1.E-assessments are only eligible for payment if the specialist has provided an opinion and/or
recommendations for patient management to the primary care physician or nurse practitioner
within 30 days from the date of the request. Where a service is requested by a nurse
practitioner the consultant shall provide the report to the nurse practitioner and the patient’s
primary care provider, if applicable.
2.E-assessments are not eligible for payment to the specialist in the following circumstances
a.when the purpose of the electronic communication is to arrange for transfer of the
patient’s care to any physician; or
b.when rendered in whole or in part to arrange for a consultation, a different assessment,
visit, or K-prefix time-based services, procedure(s), or diagnostic investigation(s); or
c.when the specialist renders a K-prefix time-based service for the same patient within 30
days following the request for the specialist e-assessment; or
d.in circumstances where the primary care physician or specialist receives compensation,
other than by fee-for service under this Schedule, for participation in the e-assessment.
3.A consultation, a different assessment or visit rendered by the specialist for the same patient
for the same diagnosis within 60 days following the request for the specialist e-assessment is
only payable as a specific or partial assessment, as appropriate to the service rendered.
4.K738 is eligible for payment to the primary care physician when this physician is required to
collect additional data (for example dermatology or ophthalmology images not present in the
primary care physician’s records) to support the specialist’s e-assessment. K738 is not
eligible for payment where existing data is already available in the primary care physician’s
records for submission to the specialist.
[Commentary:
1.Following the primary care physician’s request, the specialist decides whether an e-
assessment is the most appropriate service in the circumstances. In some cases, direct
patient contact or a consultation by videoconference may be more appropriate.
2.Payment, other than by fee-for-service, includes compensation where the physician receives
remuneration under a salary, primary care, stipend, APP or AFP model.
3.Physicians who receive compensation other than by fee-for-service under this Schedule
should consult their contract for guidance on shadow-billing.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP35 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 50 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Medical record requirements:
An e-assessment is only eligible for payment if all of the following elements are included in the
patient’s permanent medical record of the specialist:
1.patient’s name and health number;
2.name of the primary care physician or nurse practitioner;
3.date of, and reason for, the request; and
4.opinion, diagnosis, advice and/or recommendations of the specialist.
Claims submission instructions:
An e-assessment is only eligible for payment if the specialist includes the primary care
physician’s or nurse practitioner’s provider number with the claim.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP36 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 51 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Initial E-ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
Initial e-assessment is the first e-assessment performed by a particular specialist that is requested by
the primary care physician or nurse practitioner for a specific patient and diagnosis where the
specialist must review all relevant data provided by the primary care physician and provide a written
opinion that includes a diagnosis and/or management advice to the primary care physician or nurse
practitioner.
[Commentary:
The time and intensity of this service is the same as a regular consultation. The specialist may
choose to return their opinion by phone, however, a written opinion must be provided
electronically or by mail.]
Payment rules:
Initial e-assessments are limited to a maximum of one per patient per specialist per 12 month
period unless the primary care physician or nurse practitioner makes a second request in
relation to a complaint for which a clearly different diagnosis is made, unrelated to the
diagnosis made at the time of the first e-assessment in that same 12 month period, in which
case the limit is increased to a maximum of two per patient per specialist per 12 month period.
[Commentary:
If a subsequent e-assessment is related to the diagnosis made at the time of the initial e-
assessment, then this service is payable as a repeat e-assessment, follow-up e-assessment or
minor e-assessment as appropriate to the service rendered.]
repeat E-ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
Repeat e-assessment is the first e-assessment performed by a particular specialist following an initial
e-assessment or consultation by that specialist that is requested by the primary care physician or
nurse practitioner for the same diagnosis where the specialist must review all relevant data provided
by the primary care physician or nurse practitioner and provide an opinion that includes management
advice to the primary care physician or nurse practitioner.
[Commentary:
The time and intensity of this service is the same as a specific assessment. The specialist may
choose to return their opinion by phone.]
Payment rules:
Repeat e-assessments are limited to a maximum of one per patient per physician per 12 month
period unless the primary care physician or nurse practitioner makes a second request in
relation to a complaint for which a clearly different diagnosis is made, unrelated to the
diagnosis made at the time of the first e- assessment in that same 12 month period, in which
case the limit is increased to a maximum of two per patient per physician per 12 month period.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP37 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 52 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Follow-up E-ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
A follow-up e-assessment is the limited e-assessment rendered for follow-up by the specialist who
has previously rendered any insured service to the patient for the same diagnosis. The specialist must
review all relevant information submitted and provide an opinion and/or management advice to the
primary care physician or nurse practitioner.
[Commentary:
The time and intensity of the service is the same as a partial assessment. The specialist may
choose to return their opinion by phone.]
Payment rules:
Follow-up e-assessment is limited to a maximum of:
1.one (1) service per patient per day, same physician;
2.four (4) services per patient same physician per 12 month period; and
3.one thousand (1000) services per physician per 12 month period.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP38 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 53 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
MINOR E-ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
A minor e-assessment is a brief e-assessment rendered by the specialist. The specialist must review
all relevant information submitted and provide an answer to the primary care physician’s or nurse
practitioner’s specific clinical question.
Payment rules:
Minor e-assessment is limited to a maximum of:
1.one (1) service per patient per day, same physician;
2.twelve (12) services per patient same physician per 12 month period; and
3.two thousand (2000) services per physician per 12 month period.
[Commentary:
A minor e-assessment is where the primary care physician or nurse practitioner may ask a
specific question related to the patient where the information provided is limited and the
question asked is very specific. An example is where the primary care physician has initiated a
treatment recommended by the specialist, and the primary care physician requests a brief
email response related to proper dosing adjustments. One service may include multiple emails.
The specialist may choose to return their opinion by phone.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP39 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 54 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
ACUTE CARE HOSPITAL – NON-EMERGENCY IN-PATIENT SERVICES (“C” PREFIX
SERVICES)
A. Admission Assessment – General Requirements
Definition:
a. An admission assessment is the initial assessment of the patient rendered for the purpose
of admitting a patient to hospital.
b. The admitting physician is the physician who renders the admission assessment.
Payment rules:
1. Except as outlined below in paragraph 3, when the admitting physician has not previously
assessed the patient for the same presenting illness within 90 days of the admission
assessment, the admission assessment constitutes a consultation, general or medical specific
or specific assessment depending on the specialty of the physician, the nature of the service
rendered and any applicable payment rules.
2. Except as outlined below in paragraph 3, if the admitting physician has previously assessed the
patient for the same presenting illness within 90 days of the admission assessment, the
admission assessment constitutes a general re-assessment or specific re-assessment
depending on the specialty of the physician, the nature of the service rendered and any
applicable payment rules.
3. When a hospital in-patient is transferred from one physician to another physician, only one
consultation, general or specific assessment or reassessment is eligible for payment
per patient admission. The amount eligible for payment for services in excess of this limit will be
adjusted to a lesser assessment fee. An additional admission assessment is not eligible for
payment when a hospital inpatient is transferred from one physician to another physician within
the same hospital.
Admission Assessments by Specialists:
When a patient has been assessed by a specialist in the emergency room (ER) or out-patient
department (OPD) and that physician renders a service described as a consultation, specific
assessment, or medical specific assessment and subsequently admits the patient to hospital, the
initial consultation, specific, or medical specific assessment constitutes the admission assessment.
When a patient has been assessed by a specialist in the ER or OPD, and that physician renders any
other assessment other than those listed in the paragraph immediately above, and that physician
subsequently admits the patient to hospital, an admission assessment is eligible for payment in
addition to the initial assessment, if each service is rendered separately.
[Commentary:
In accordance with the surgical preamble, a hospital admission assessment by the surgeon is
not eligible for payment, unless it is the “major pre-operative visit” (i.e., the consultation or
assessment which may be claimed when the decision to operate is made and the operation is
scheduled).]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP40 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 55 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
Admission Assessments by General and Family Practitioners:
When a patient has been assessed by a general or family practitioner in the emergency room (ER) or
out-patient department (OPD) and that physician renders a service described as a consultation,
general assessment, or general re-assessment and subsequently admits the patient to hospital, the
initial consultation, general assessment, general re-assessment constitutes the admission
assessment.
When a patient has been assessed by a general or family practitioner in the ER or OPD and that
physician renders any other assessment other than those listed in the paragraph immediately above,
and subsequently admits the patient to hospital, an admission assessment is eligible for payment in
addition to the initial assessment, if each assessment is rendered separately.
Payment rules:
A933/C933/C003/C004 are not eligible for payment for an admission assessment for an elective
surgery patient when a pre-operative assessment has been rendered to the same patient within 30
days of admission by the same physician.
Admission Assessments by General and Family Practitioners in an Emergency
Department Funded under an Emergency Department Alternative Funding Agreement:
When a patient has been assessed by the patient's general or family practitioner in an emergency
room and that physician subsequently admits the patient to hospital, the General/Family Physician
Emergency Department Assessment constitutes the admission assessment if the physician remains
the most responsible physician for the patient.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP41 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 56 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
Admission Assessments by Emergency Physicians:
When a patient has been assessed by an emergency physician in the ER or OPD and that physician
renders a service described as a consultation, general assessment, or general re-assessment and
subsequently admits the patient to hospital as the most responsible physician or that physician is
asked to perform the admission assessment (even though the patient is admitted under a different
most responsible physician), the initial consultation, general assessment, or general re-assessment
constitutes the admission assessment.
When a patient has been assessed by an emergency physician in the ER or OPD and that physician
renders any other assessment other than those listed in the paragraph immediately above, and
subsequently renders the admission assessment, (even if the patient is admitted under a different
most responsible physician), the admission assessment is payable as C004, in addition to the initial
assessment, if both services are rendered separately.
Admission Assessment by the Most Responsible Physician (MRP) Premium
E082 Admission assessment by the MRP, to admission
assessment .......................................................... add 30%
Payment rules:
1.E082 is only eligible for payment once per patient per hospital admission.
2.E082 is only eligible for payment:
a.if the physician establishes that he or she does not receive any direct or indirect
remuneration from a hospital or hospital foundation for rendering in-patient clinical
services; or
b.where the physician receives any direct or indirect remuneration from a hospital or
hospital foundation for rendering in-patient clinical services, if the physician establishes
that such remuneration has been reduced by an amount equal to the amount that would
be eligible for payment to the physician had he or she not received any such direct or
indirect remuneration.
3.E082 is not eligible for payment for transfers within the same hospital.
4.E082 is not applicable to any other service or premium.
[Commentary:
1.E082 is only eligible for payment when the admitting physician is the MRP. If the MRP does
not render the admission assessment, E082 is not eligible for payment for any service
rendered by any physician during that hospital admission.
2.E082 is not eligible for payment for a patient admitted for obstetrical delivery or for a
newborn.
3.E082 is not applicable for any consultation or assessment related to day surgery.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP42 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 57 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
B. Subsequent Visit
Definition:
A subsequent visit is any routine assessment in hospital following the hospital admission assessment.
Attendance at Surgery: If, in the interest of the patient, the referring physician is asked to be
present by the patient or the patient’s representative, but does not assist at the procedure, the
attendance at surgery by the referring physician constitutes a hospital subsequent visit.
Multidisciplinary care: Except where a single service for a team of physicians is listed in this
Schedule (e.g. the weekly team fee for dialysis), when the complexity of the medical condition
requires the services of several physicians in different disciplines, each physician visit
constitutes a subsequent visit.
Payment rules:
1. Except in the circumstances outlined in paragraphs 2 and 3, or when a patient is referred from
one physician to another (see Claims submission instruction below), subsequent visits are
limited to one per patient, per day for the first 5 weeks after admission, 3 visits per week from 6
to 13 weeks after admission, and 6 visits per month after 13 weeks. Services in excess of the
limit are not eligible for payment.
2. After 5 weeks of hospitalization, any assessment in hospital required as a result of an acute
intercurrent illness in excess of the weekly or monthly limits set out above constitutes C121 –
“additional visit due to intercurrent illness”. The weekly or monthly limits set out above do not
apply to additional visits due to intercurrent illness.
3. Pediatric subsequent visits (C262) are limited to one per patient, per day for the duration of the
admission.
4. When a physician is already in the hospital and assesses one of his/her own patients or patients
transferred to his/her care, the service constitutes a subsequent visit. If a physician assesses
another physician’s patient on an emergency basis, the General Listings (“A” prefix) apply.
Claims submission instruction:
When a hospital in-patient is referred from one physician to another physician, the date the second
physician assessed the patient for the first time is considered the “admission date” for the purposes of
determining the appropriate subsequent visit fee code.
[Commentary:
When a hospital in-patient is transferred from one physician to another physician, subsequent
visits by the second physician are calculated based on the actual admission date of the
patient.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP43 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 58 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
C. Subsequent visit by the Most Responsible Physician (MRP)
Subsequent visit by the MRP – day following the hospital admission assessment (C122)
Definition:
Subsequent visit by the MRP - day following the hospital admission assessment is payable to the
physician identified as the patient’s MRP for rendering a subsequent visit on this day.
Subsequent visit by the MRP – second day following the hospital admission assessment
(C123)
Definition:
Subsequent visit by the MRP - second day following the hospital admission assessment is payable to
the physician identified as the patient’s MRP for rendering a subsequent visit on this day.
Payment rules:
1. C122, C123 are limited to a maximum of one each per hospital admission.
[Commentary:
C122, C123 are only payable for visits rendered by the MRP. Services rendered by physicians
who are not the MRP may be payable at a lesser visit fee.]
2. C122, C123 are not eligible for payment:
a. when rendered to the same patient the same day as C124 (Subsequent visit by the MRP -
day of discharge);
b. for a patient admitted for obstetrical delivery or newborn care; or
c. for any visit rendered by a surgeon during the 2 days prior to non-Z prefix surgery.
3. C122, C123 are not payable for a subsequent visit rendered by a surgeon to a hospital in-
patient following non-Z prefix surgery.
[Commentary:
The first and second post-operative visits by the surgeon to a hospital in-patient following non-
Z prefix surgery constitute post-operative visits payable at the appropriate specialty specific
subsequent visit fee.]
4. When a patient is transferred to another physician within the same hospital during either of
these days, C122 or C123 are only payable to the physician who was the MRP for the majority
of the day.
5. When a patient is transferred to another physician at a different hospital, the day of transfer shall
be deemed for payment purposes to be the day of admission.
6. Only one of C122 or C142 is eligible for payment for the same patient during the same hospital
admission. Only one of C123 or C143 is eligible for payment for the same patient during the
same hospital admission.
[Commentary:
For first and second subsequent visits by the MRP following transfer from an Intensive Care
Area (C142, C143), see General Preamble page GP46.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP44 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 59 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
Subsequent visit by the MRP - day of discharge (C124)
Definition/Required elements of service:
Subsequent visit by the MRP – day of discharge is payable to the physician identified as the MRP for
rendering a subsequent visit on the day of discharge, and, in addition, requires completion of the
discharge summary by the physician within 48 hours of discharge, arranging for follow-up of the
patient (as appropriate) and prescription of discharge medications if any.
The discharge summary must include as a minimum the following information:
a. reason for admission;
b. procedures performed during the hospitalization;
c. discharge diagnosis; and
d. medications on discharge.
Payment rules:
1.C124 is only payable to the MRP and limited to one service per hospital admission.
2.C124 is not eligible for payment under any of the following circumstances:
a.The patient was discharged within 48 hours of admission to hospital (calculated from the
actual date of admission to hospital);
b.The admission was for obstetrical delivery unless the mother required admission to an
ICU, with subsequent transfer and discharge from another unit within the hospital during
the hospital stay;
c.The admission was for newborn care unless the infant was admitted to a NICU, with
subsequent transfer and discharge from another unit within the hospital during the
hospital stay;
d.For transfers within the same hospital; or
e.For discharges directly from a NICU or ICU where NICU or ICU critical care per diem
services were rendered the same day.
[Commentary:
In the case of conflicting claims for this service, the physician to whom the patient has rostered
(virtual or actual) may receive the payment for the service.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP45 Amd 12 Draft 1