Section: GP - General Preamble
Pages: 15 to 126
Extracted text length: 219523 characters
============================================================

--- PAGE 15 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
General PreambleMarch 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
INTRODUCTION
[Commentary:
The Health Insurance Act and, to a lesser extent, the Integrated Community Health Services
Centres Act, 2023 and the Commitment to the Future of Medicare Act, 2004, provide the legal
foundation and framework for the Schedule of Benefits for Physician Services (“the Schedule”).
The Schedule lists services insured by OHIP and includes the General Preamble (which
impacts all physicians), Consultations and Visits section (which applies to all specialties) and
specific system and/or specialty sections (including specialty preambles).
The General Preamble provides details about billing requirements for all physicians as follows:
The initial Definitions Section (GP2) begins with general definitions of key terms and phrases
used in the Schedule. Those terms and phrases are italicized throughout the General Preamble
as an indication that further information is available in the Definitions Section. The second
group of defined terms refers specifically to maximums, minimums, and time or unit-based
services.
The information provided in the General Information Section (GP8) is the foundation for the
remainder of the General Preamble. A variety of subjects are reviewed as detailed in the table
of contents. This is followed by the Constituent and Common Elements of Insured Services
(GP13). Next is the section which lists the Specific Elements of Assessments (GP15). The
next section provides information on Consultations and Assessments (GP16) followed by
the section regarding services provided only in Hospitals and Other Institutions (GP40).
The next section focuses on psychotherapy, counselling, and related services, followed by a
similar review of services that involve interviews. The remaining sections include special visits,
surgical assistants’ services, anaesthesiologists’ services, and others as listed in the table of
contents.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP1 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 16 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
GENERAL DEFINITIONS
The words, phrases, and abbreviations defined below are italicized throughout the General Preamble
for cross-reference. Unless otherwise specified, the following terms and expressions have the
following meanings:
A. Age Definitions
adolescent a person 16 or 17 years of age
adult a person 18 years of age and older
child a person 2 years to and including 15 years of age
infant a person from 29 days up to, and less than, 2 years of age
newborn a person from birth up to, and including, 28 days of age
B. Time Definitions
12 month any period of 12 consecutive months
period
calendar year the period from January 1 to December 31
day a calendar day
fiscal year from April 1 of one year to March 31 of the following year
month a calendar month
week any period of 7 consecutive days
C. Other Definitions
Act Health Insurance Act
Body Mass the ratio of the patient’s mass (measured in kilograms) to the square of the
Index (BMI) patient’s height (measured in metres)
Bariatric a facility that is approved and funded by the Ministry of Health for the
Regional assessment and treatment of morbid obesity for persons who have been
Assessment referred to the facility for that purpose.
and Treatment
Centre (RATC)
common the components that are included in all insured physician services
elements
constituent the common elements and, where applicable, the specific elements of an
elements insured service
CPSO College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario
Dental Surgeon a health care practitioner who meets the definition of “dental surgeon” as set
out in Regulation 552 under the Act, and who has been issued an OHIP
registration number.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP2 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 17 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
emergency an office or other place, including Urgent Care Centres, Walk-in Clinics,
department Extended Hours Clinics, or other settings (other than a hospital emergency
equivalent department) in which the only insured services provided are to patients who
do not have pre-arranged appointments
general all forms of anaesthesia except local infiltration
anaesthesia
“H” fee a fee set out in the Schedule for the technical component of a diagnostic
service provided either in a hospital or in an offsite premise operated by the
hospital corporation that has received approval under section 4 of the Public
Hospitals Act
holiday (for other than “H” prefix emergency department listings and Emergency
Department Equivalent - A888) means all of the following:
1. Family Day, Good Friday, Victoria Day, Canada Day, Civic Holiday, Labour Day,
Thanksgiving, New Year’s Day, and if the holiday falls on a Saturday or Sunday either
the Friday before or the Monday following the holiday, as determined at the choice of the
physician.
2. Boxing Day and if Boxing Day falls on a Saturday, the Monday following Boxing Day.
3. Christmas Day and
a. if Christmas Day falls on a Sunday, the Friday before Christmas Day;
or
b. if Christmas Day falls on a Saturday, the Friday before and the Monday following
Christmas Day.
holiday (for “H” prefix emergency department listings and Emergency Department
Equivalent - A888) means all of the following:
Family Day, Good Friday, Victoria Day, Canada Day, Civic Holiday, Labour Day,
Thanksgiving, New Year’s Day, December 25 through December 31 (inclusive) and,
a. if Christmas Day falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the Friday before Christmas Day;
and
b. if New Year’s Day falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the Monday following New Year’s
Day;
and
c. if Canada Day falls on a Saturday or Sunday either the Friday before or the Monday
following Canada Day, as determined at the choice of the physician.
[Commentary:
1.Only services rendered on a holiday as defined above and listed as a holiday premium or
service, e.g. certain special visit premiums, after-hours premiums and H-code emergency
department services, are eligible for payment as holiday claims.
2.Special visit premiums are not eligible for payment with A888.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP3 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 18 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
home patient’s place of residence including a multiple resident dwelling or single
location that shares a common external building entrance or lobby, such as
an apartment block, rest or retirement home, commercial hotel, motel or
boarding house, university or boarding school residence, hostel,
correctional facility, or group home and other than a hospital or Long-Term
Care institution
ICHSC Integrated Community Health Services Centre under the Integrated
Community Health Services Centres Act, 2023.
independent a procedural code with a “Z” prefix (which is payable in addition to the
operative amount payable for an assessment)
procedure
(IOP)
major the consultation or assessment where the decision to operate is made,
preoperative regardless of the time interval between the major preoperative visit and the
visit surgery
may include when “may” or “may include” are used in the description of a listed service,
all of the other services, or elements of, or components of insured services
that are referred to following the terms “may”, “may include”, and that are
performed in conjunction with the listed service are optional, but when
rendered are included in the amount payable for the listed service
medical a designated MOH physician
consultant
MOH Ministry of Health
most the attending physician who is primarily responsible for the day-to-day care
responsible of a hospital in-patient
physician
not eligible for when a service or a claim submitted for a service is described as “not
payment eligible for payment”, the service remains an insured service for which the
amount payable is zero
[Commentary:
Patients cannot be charged for services described as “not eligible for payment” as they remain
insured services.]
nurse has the same meaning as “registered nurse in the extended class” as set
practitioner out in Regulation 552 under the Act.
OHIP Ontario Health Insurance Plan
OMA Ontario Medical Association
only eligible for when a service is described as “only eligible for payment” when certain
payment conditions are met and those conditions are not met, the service becomes
not eligible for payment.
[Commentary:
Patients cannot be charged for services described as “only eligible for payment” as they remain
insured services.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP4 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 19 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
palliative care care provided to a terminally ill patient in the final year of life where the
decision has been made that there will be no aggressive treatment of the
underlying disease and care is to be directed to maintaining the comfort of
the patient until death occurs
patient’s the legal representative of a patient
representative
“P” fee the fee for the professional component of a diagnostic service
professional a class of service listed in the Schedule headed by a column listed “P” or
component with “professional component” listed opposite the service
[Commentary:
Additional information including the requirements for performing the professional component is
found in the individual preambles to the applicable sections of the Schedule.]
referral written request by a physician, nurse practitioner, or dental surgeon in
connection with an insured dental procedure rendered in a hospital for the
provision of expert services by another physician to the patient of the
referring physician, nurse practitioner, or dental surgeon.
rendered means that the service must be personally performed by the physician and
personally by may not be delegated to any other person. Services that are required to be
the physician “rendered personally by the physician” are uninsured if this requirement is
not met
Schedule Schedule of Benefits for Physician Services
specialist a physician who holds one of the following:
1. a certification issued by the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of Canada
(RCPSC);
2. a certificate of registration issued by the CPSO to a physician who has successfully
completed the Assessment program for International Medical Graduates (APIMG) in a
recognized medical or surgical specialty;
3. a certificate of registration as a specialist issued by the CPSO to a physician employed;
– in a full-time teaching or full-time research appointment in a recognized medical
or surgical specialty other than family or general practice; and
– by the faculty of medicine of an Ontario university at the rank of assistant
professor or higher;
4. a certificate of registration issued on the order of the Registration Committee of the
CPSO to a physician who practices in a recognized medical or surgical specialty other
than family or general practice, where the requirements of registration are otherwise not
met, and to which certificate terms, conditions, or limitations may be attached; or
5. an equivalent certificate as described in 2, 3 or 4 above, issued by another Canadian
jurisdiction to a physician who is exempted from subsections 9 (1) and (3) of the
Medicine Act, 1991 by a regulation made under that Act.
specific specific components, in addition to the common elements, that are included
elements in particular insured physician services found in the General Preamble or
the specialty section of the Schedule
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP5 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 20 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
“T” fee the fee for the technical component of a service listed in the Pulmonary
Function Studies section of the Schedule
technical a class of service listed in the Schedule headed by a column listed “H” or “T”
component or with “technical component” listed opposite the service
[Commentary:
Additional information including the requirements for performing the technical component is
found in the individual preambles to the applicable sections of the schedule.]
transferal permanent or temporary complete transfer of the responsibility for the care
of the patient from one physician to another
[Commentary:
A transferal occurs, for example, where the first physician is leaving temporarily on holidays
and is unable to continue to treat the patient.]
uninsured a service that is not prescribed as “insured” under the Act
service
with or without when “with or without” are used in the description of a listed service, all of
the other services, or elements of, or components of insured services that
are referred to following the terms “with or without”, and that are performed
in conjunction with the listed service are optional, but when rendered are
insured and are included in the amount payable for the listed service
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP6 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 21 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DEFINITIONS
MAXIMUMS, MINIMUMS AND TIME OR UNIT-BASED SERVICES
In this Schedule when the amount payable for a service is described:
a. In terms of a maximum number of services without reference to a specific time period to
which the maximum applies, this means that the maximum refers to a maximum number of
services per patient per day. Those services rendered to the same patient on the same day
in excess of the maximum for that patient on that day are not eligible for payment.
b. In terms of a maximum number of services with reference to a specific time period to which
the maximum applies, the services are calculated per patient and the number of services is
based upon services rendered chronologically. Those services rendered to the same patient
during that specific time period in excess of the maximum for that patient are not eligible for
payment.
c. In terms of a maximum with reference to a specific part of the anatomy, this means a
maximum number of services per patient per day. Those services rendered in excess of the
maximum for that specific part of the anatomy per patient on that day are not eligible for
payment.
d. In terms of a minimum number of services without reference to a specific time period to
which the minimum applies, this means that the minimum refers to a minimum number of
services per patient per day. With the exception of those services listed in the “Diagnostic
Radiology” section of the Schedule or unless specifically stated otherwise, where less than
the number of services required to satisfy the minimum are rendered, the services are not
eligible for payment.
e. In terms of “repeat” or “repeats”, except with respect to repeat consultations or unless
otherwise stated, this means the same service(s) is rendered to the same patient by the
same physician on the same day.
f. In terms of a minimum required duration of time, the physician must record on the patient’s
permanent medical record or chart the time when the insured service started and ended. If
the patient’s permanent medical record or chart does not include this required information,
the service is not eligible for payment.
g. Based upon the number of “units” of service rendered, the physician must record on the
patient’s permanent medical record or chart the time when the insured service started and
ended. If the patient’s permanent medical record or chart does not include this required
information, the service is not eligible for payment.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP7 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 22 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
GENERAL INFORMATION
[Commentary: Services Insured by OHIP
The Schedule is established under section 37.1 of regulation 552 under the Act. The fees listed
are the amounts payable by OHIP for insured services. Insured services under the Act are
limited to those which are listed in this Schedule, medically necessary, are not otherwise
excluded by legislation or regulation, and are rendered personally by physicians or by others
delegated to perform them where such delegation is authorized in accordance with the
Schedule requirements for delegated services.
Some services are specifically listed as uninsured in regulation 552, section 24 of the Act (see
Appendix A), such as a service that is solely for the purpose of altering or restoring
appearance. Other services may be uninsured depending on the circumstances. An example
of a service which is uninsured in limited circumstances is psychotherapy, which is uninsured
where it is a requirement for the patient to obtain a diploma or degree or to fulfill a course of
study. Other examples of commonly uninsured services include missed appointments or
procedures, circumcision except if medically necessary, and certain services rendered and
documents and forms completed in connection with non-medically necessary requests (e.g. life
insurance application).]
[Commentary: Modifications to the Schedule
Under agreement between the MOH and the OMA, additions, deletions, fee changes, or other
modifications to the Schedule, are made by the MOH following consultation and/or negotiation
with the OMA. Physicians who wish to have modifications to the Schedule considered should
submit any proposals to the Physician Payment Committee (PPC) through the appropriate
clinical section of the OMA.
In the situation where a new therapy or procedure is being introduced into Ontario, and the
physicians performing the new therapy or procedure wish to have a new fee item inserted into
the Schedule, the following process is recommended.
An application for a new fee related to the new therapy or procedure should be submitted by
the appropriate section(s) of the OMA to the PPC for consideration, with documentation
supporting the introduction of this item into the Schedule. The PPC will advise OHIP whether or
not this new therapy is experimental. If the PPC and the MOH agree that the item is
experimental, the service is deemed uninsured (in accordance with section 24 of regulation
552 under the Act), and will not be introduced into the Schedule. If the MOH, on the advice of
the PPC, determines that the new therapy or procedure is not experimental, the fee application
will be handled in the usual manner as detailed above.]
[Commentary: Medical Research
Examinations or procedures for the purpose of a research or survey program are not insured
services, nor are services provided by a laboratory or a hospital that support an examination or
procedure that is for the purpose of research or a survey. The exception to this is that an
assessment conducted to determine if an insured person is suitable for such a program is not
necessarily an uninsured service (see section 24 of regulation 552 under the Act - this is
provided as Appendix A of the Schedule).]
[Commentary: Medical Records
All insured services must be documented in appropriate records. The Act requires that the
record establish that:
1.an insured service was provided;
2.the service for which the account is submitted is the service that was rendered; and
3.the service was medically necessary.
The medical record requirements as found in the Act are listed in Appendix G of the Schedule.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP8 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 23 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
GENERAL INFORMATION
GENERAL PAYMENT RULES
[Commentary:
Claims for payment must be submitted to OHIP in the form and by the medium (e.g. electronic
data transmission; machine readable input) as set out in sections 38.3 to 38.5 of regulation 552
under the Act and must contain the information required by the regulation and the General
Manager of OHIP. Regulation 552 under the Act can be found at:
http://www.e-laws.gov.on.ca/DBLaws/Regs/English/900552_e.htm.
Claims must be submitted within three months of the date the service was rendered, except in
extenuating circumstances. A claim cannot be accepted for payment unless it meets all of the
technical and formal requirements set out in the Act and regulations.]
1. The fee is payable only to the physician who rendered the service personally, or by the
physician whose delegate rendered the service where delegation is authorized in accordance
with the Schedule.
2. Where more than one physician renders different components of a listed service, only one fee is
payable for that service, and the fee is payable only where the Schedule provides that different
physicians may perform different components of the service.
[Commentary:
Where an insured service contains several components (e.g. surgical procedures that include
post-operative care or fracture care), the components of the service are not divisible among
physicians for claims purposes and the physicians are responsible for apportioning payment
amongst themselves.]
3. Where the Schedule provides that different physicians may substitute for one another in
performing the total service, only one fee is payable for the service.
[Commentary:
When physicians routinely or frequently substitute for each other in providing hospital visits to
registered bed patients in active treatment hospitals, e.g. weekend coverage or daily rounds by
various members of a group, the most responsible physician may claim for all the visits.]
Specialist services
When a service rendered by a specialist comprises part of an insured consultation or assessment that
falls within the scope of his or her specialist practice, the service is not eligible for payment unless the
claim for the service is submitted either:
a. unless otherwise noted, in respect of a service described in the portions of the Consultations
and Visits section of this Schedule that reflects the physician’s Royal College of Physicians
and Surgeons of Canada specialty, as documented in the records maintained by the MOH
for claims payment purposes; or
b. in respect of a service described in this Schedule under the following sub-headings which
can be claimed by any specialty: psychotherapy, counselling, HIV primary care, palliative
care support, hypnotherapy, certification of mental illness, interviews, genetic assessments,
midwife or aboriginal midwife-requested emergency and special emergency assessments,
home care application, or home care supervision.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP9 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 24 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
GENERAL INFORMATION
When a service rendered by a specialist does not fall within the scope of the specialist’s practice and/
or the specialist is providing primary care in a family or general practice setting, the service is only
eligible for payment when the claim is submitted using the appropriate code from the “Family Practice
& Practice in General” listings.
When more than one assessment is rendered to a patient during the same visit by the same physician
who is qualified in one or more specialties, only one assessment is payable.
[Commentary:
Any additional assessment is not eligible for payment.]
Use of Codes, Prefixes and Suffixes
[Commentary:
Services are generally, but not necessarily, listed by anatomical system or specialty for
convenience.]
The alpha-numeric fee code opposite the service listing in this Schedule must be set out in the claim
submitted, together with the required suffix.
Surgical Codes: In the surgical part of the Schedule, the required suffixes are:
suffix A if the physician performs the procedure;
suffix B if the physician assisted at the surgery; and
suffix C if the physician administered the anaesthetic.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP10 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 25 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
2.Diagnostic Radiology;
GENERAL INFORMATION
GENERAL PAYMENT RULES
Diagnostic Services Rendered at a Hospital
The technical component of those diagnostic services that are listed with "technical component" or in
a column headed "H" or "T" is not eligible for payment if the service is rendered to a patient who:
1. is an in-patient of a hospital; or
2. attends a hospital where he or she receives an insured diagnostic service; and
3. within 24 hours of receiving that diagnostic service, is admitted to the same hospital as an in-
patient in connection with the same condition, illness, injury or disease in relation to which the
diagnostic service was rendered.
[Commentary:
1.For those diagnostic services which have both technical and professional components listed
under one fee schedule code, the technical and professional components are claimed
separately. The claim for the technical component is submitted using the fee schedule code
with the suffix B and the claim for the professional component is submitted using the fee
schedule code with a suffix C.
2.The technical component may be listed as either "technical component" or in a column
headed "H" or "T". The professional component may be listed as either "professional
component" or in a column headed "P".]
The technical component of a diagnostic service listed in the column headed with an "H" and rendered
outside of a hospital is not eligible for payment under the Health Insurance Act.
Payment for Diagnostic and Therapeutic Services Rendered at a Hospital
The technical component of a diagnostic and therapeutic service listed below and rendered in a
hospital is payable at 94.68% of the listed fee in the column headed “T”.
G104A, G111A, G121A, G127A, G140A, G143A, G146A, G149A, G152A, G153A, G167A,
G174A,G181A, G209A, G284A, G308A, G310A, G311A, G315A, G414A, G440A, G441A, G442A,
G443A,G448A, G451A, G455A, G466A, G471A, G519A, G540A, G541A, G542A, G544A, G554A,
G570A,G574A, G582A, G585A, G647A, G648A, G651A, G652A, G654A, G655A, G682A, G683A,
G684A,G685A, G686A, G687A, G688A, G689A, G694A, G695A, G815A, G850A, G851A, G852A,
G853A,G854A, G855A, G856A, G857A, G858A, J301B, J304B, J324B, J327B
Technical Component Requirements
The technical component of a diagnostic procedure as described in the relevant section of the
Schedule is only eligible for payment where:
1. the physician has the necessary training and experience to personally render the technical
component of the service; and
2. the physician maintains documentation that describes the process by which the physician
monitors quality assurance in accordance with professional standards.
[Commentary:
1.The physician submitting a claim for the technical component is responsible for the complete
quality assurance process for all elements of the technical component of the service,
including data acquisition, reporting, and record keeping. The physician must be able to
demonstrate the above upon request by the MOH.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP11 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 26 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
GENERAL INFORMATION
2.For delegated services rendered in the physician’s office, see the Delegated Procedures
section in the General Preamble of this Schedule.]
Consultation and Assessment Codes
There are four different prefixes used for consultations and assessments listed in the “Consultations
and Visits” section of the Schedule. The codes with the “A” prefix are described as the “General
Listings”. These must be used when submitting a claim for consultations and assessments except in
the following situations when the code listed below must be used:
1. acute care hospital – non-emergency in-patient services – “C” prefix codes;
2. long term care institution – non-emergency in-patient services – “W” prefix codes;
3. emergency department – services rendered by a physician on duty – “H” prefix (H1- codes); or
4. rehabilitation unit – services rendered by a specialist in Physical Medicine – “H” prefix codes
(H3XX codes)
[Commentary:
Submit claim using an “A” prefix assessment when an assessment is rendered in conjunction
with a special visit premium. Information regarding when special visit premiums are payable is
found on pages GP65 to GP78 of the General Preamble.]
Independent Consideration (IC)
Services listed in the Schedule without specified fees are identified as “IC” and are given independent
consideration by the medical consultant. Claims for such services must be submitted with a
supporting letter explaining the amount of the fee claimed, and must include an appropriate operative
or consultation report, and a comparison of the scope and difficulty of the procedure in relation to non-
IC procedures in the Schedule. For treatment of tumours not listed in the Schedule, surgeons must
use the IC code, R993, and for surgical procedures not listed, but similar to a listed service, the code,
R990.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP12 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 27 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSTITUENT AND COMMON ELEMENTS OF INSURED SERVICES
[Commentary:
This Schedule identifies the constituent elements that comprise insured services. Common
elements apply to all insured services and specific elements apply to specific groups of
services where identified either in the General Preamble or in the preamble to a specific
system and/or specialty sections of the Schedule. There may be additional specific
requirements (“required elements of service”, “payment rules”, “claims submission instructions”
or “notes”) for some individual services, and these are noted with the description of any such
service within the Schedule. In order to determine the correct claim to use for a service
rendered, the necessary information is found by reviewing the common elements, specific
elements, and service specific information.
No charges may be made (except to OHIP) for an insured service rendered to an insured
person or for any of the constituent elements of such insured services. This is prohibited by the
Act and/or the Commitment to the Future of Medicare Act, 2004.
Most services include as a constituent element of the service the provision of the premises,
equipment, supplies, and personnel used in the performance of the common and specific
elements of the service. This is not, however, the case for services denoted by codes marked
with the prefix “#”, and for services that are divided into professional and technical components
where only the professional component is an insured service under the Act.
For those codes denoted with the prefix “#” and performed in a hospital, the premises,
equipment, supplies, and personnel used to perform all elements of the service are funded by
the hospital global budget.
For those services denoted with the prefix “#” and provided in an Integrated Community Health
Services Centre (ICHSC), the premises, equipment, supplies, and personnel are funded under
the facility costs set out in the Integrated Community Health Services Centres Act, 2023.
Patients cannot be charged for the premises, equipment, supplies and personnel for services
denoted with the prefix “#” rendered outside of a hospital or ICHSC if the premises, equipment,
supplies and personnel support, assist or provide a necessary adjunct to an insured service
denoted with the prefix “#” as charging a patient would be contrary to the Integrated
Community Health Services Centres Act, 2023.]
COMMON ELEMENTS OF INSURED SERVICES
All insured services include the skill, time, and responsibility involved in performing, including when
delegated to a non-physician in accordance with the Delegated Procedures Section (GP62) of the
General Preamble, supervising the performance of the constituent elements of the service.
Unless otherwise specifically listed in the Schedule, the following elements are common to all insured
services.
A. Being available to provide follow-up insured services to the patient and arranging for coverage
when not available.
B. Making arrangements for appointment(s) for the insured service.
C. Travelling to and from the place(s) where any element(s) of the service is (are) performed.
[Commentary:
Travelling to visit an insured person outside of the usual geographical area of practice of the
person making the visit is an uninsured service – see Regulation 552 section 24(1) paragraph
1 under the Act.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP13 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 28 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSTITUENT AND COMMON ELEMENTS OF INSURED SERVICES
D. Obtaining and reviewing information (including history taking) from any appropriate source(s) so as
to arrive at any decision(s) made in order to perform the elements of the service.
Appropriate sources include but are not limited to:
1. patient and patient’s representative
2. patient charts and records
3. investigational data
4. physicians, pharmacists, and other health professionals
5. suppliers and manufacturers of drugs and devices
6. relevant literature and research data.
E. Obtaining consents or delivering written consents, unless otherwise specifically listed in the
Schedule.
F. Keeping and maintaining appropriate medical records.
G. Providing any medical prescriptions except where the request for this service is initiated by the
patient or patient’s representative and no related insured service is provided.
H. Preparing or submitting documents or records, or providing information for use in programs
administered by the MOH.
I. Conferring with or providing advice, direction, information, or records to physicians and other
professionals associated with the health and development of the patient.
J. Such planning, preparation, and administration for the performance of the elements of the service
directly attributable either to a specific patient or to a physician maintaining his/her practice, unless
otherwise specifically listed in the Schedule.
K. Except for services denoted by codes marked with the prefix “#”, or for services that are divided into
professional and technical components where only the professional component is an insured
service under the Act, providing premises, equipment, supplies, and personnel for the common
elements of the service.
L. Waiting times associated with the provision of the service(s).
While no occasion may arise for performing elements A, B, C, D, F, G, H or K when performed in
connection with the specific elements of a service, these are included in the service.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP14 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 29 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIFIC ELEMENTS OF ASSESSMENTS
In addition to the common elements, all services which are described as assessments, or as including
assessments (e.g. consultations), include the following specific elements:
A. A direct physical encounter with the patient including taking a patient history and performing a
physical examination.
B. Other inquiry (including taking a patient history), carried out to arrive at an opinion as to the nature
of the patient’s condition, (whether such inquiry takes place before, during or after the encounter
during which the physical examination takes place) and/or follow-up care.
C. Performing any procedure(s) during the same encounter as the physical examination, unless the
procedure(s) is(are) separately listed in the Schedule and an amount is payable for the procedure
in conjunction with an assessment.
“Procedure” in this context includes obtaining specimens, preparation of the patient, interpretation
of results and, unless otherwise specified, all diagnostic (including laboratory) and therapeutic
(including surgical) services;
D. Making arrangements for any related assessments, procedures or therapy, and/or interpreting
results.
E. Making arrangements for follow-up care.
F. Discussion with, and providing advice and information, including prescribing therapy to the patient
or the patient’s representative, whether by telephone or otherwise, on matters related to:
1. the service; and
2. in circumstances in which it would be professionally appropriate that results can be reported
upon prior to any further patient visit, the results of related procedure(s) and/or assessment(s).
G. When medically indicated, monitoring the condition of the patient and intervening, until the next
insured service is provided.
H. Providing premises, equipment, supplies, and personnel for the specific elements of the service
except for any aspect(s) that is (are) performed in a hospital or nursing home.
While no occasion may arise for performing elements C, D, E, G, or H, when performed in connection
with the other specific elements, they are included in the assessment.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP15 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 30 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
CONSULTATIONS
CONSULTATION
Definition/Required elements of service:
A consultation is an assessment rendered following a written request from a referring:
1. physician
2. nurse practitioner or
3. dental surgeon in connection with an insured dental procedure rendered in a hospital,
who, in light of his/her professional knowledge of the patient, requests the opinion of a physician (the
“consultant physician”) competent to give advice in this field because of the complexity, seriousness,
or obscurity of the case, or because another opinion is requested by the patient or patient’s
representative.
[Commentary:
1.The referring physician, nurse practitioner or dental surgeon must determine if multiple
requests by a patient or the patient’s representative to different physicians in the same
specialty for the same condition are medically necessary. Services that are not medically
necessary are uninsured.
2.If the physician rendering the service requests a referring physician, nurse practitioner or
dental surgeon to submit a consultation request for that service after the service has been
provided, a consultation is not payable. The visit fee appropriate to the service rendered may
be claimed.
3. Where a physician who has been paid for a consultation for the patient for the same
diagnosis makes a request for a referral for ongoing management of the patient, the service
rendered following the referral is not payable as a consultation, except as outlined in the
Virtual Care Services section under definitions, part 3, commentary 3]
A consultation includes the services necessary to enable the consultant to prepare a written report
(including findings, opinions, and recommendations) to the referring physician, nurse practitioner or
dental surgeon. Where the referral is made by a nurse practitioner, the consultant shall provide the
report to the nurse practitioner and the patient’s primary care provider, if applicable. Except where
otherwise specified, the consultant is required to perform a general, specific or medical specific
assessment, including a review of all relevant data.
The following are additional requirements for a consultation:
a. A copy of the written request for the consultation, signed by the referring physician, nurse
practitioner or dental surgeon must be kept in the consulting physician’s medical record,
except in the case of a consultation which occurs in a hospital, long-term care institution or
multi-specialty clinic where common medical records are maintained. In such cases, the
written request may be contained on the common medical record.
b. The request identifies the consultant by name, the referring physician, nurse practitioner or
dental surgeon by name and billing number, and identifies the patient by name and health
number.
c. The written request sets out the information relevant to the referral and specifies the
service(s) required.
In the event these requirements are not met, the amount payable for a consultation will be reduced to
a lesser assessment fee.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP16 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 31 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSULTATIONS
[Commentary:
The request would ordinarily also include appropriate clinical information, such as the reason
for the referral for consultation, present and past history, physical findings and relevant test
results and reports.]
Payment rules:
1. Consultations rendered to the same patient by the same physician for the same diagnosis are
limited to one service per two consecutive 12 month periods except:
a. When the additional consultation service(s) is a repeat consultation;
b. When a consultant has rendered a consultation service to a patient in any location and the
same consultant is referred to the same patient a second time with the same diagnosis, then
the number of consultations eligible for payment is a total of two services per two
consecutive 12 month periods only when:
i. the second consultation is rendered for a hospital inpatient or a patient in an Emergency
Department; and
ii. the consultation is rendered more than 12 months but less than 24 months following the
first consultation.
See the Table below.
Limits on Consultation Services Rendered for the Same
Problem Within Two Consecutive 12 Month Periods
Total consultation
services eligible for
Patient location where
payment in two
consultation rendered
consecutive 12 month
periods
Services
Services
rendered
Second rendered
First consultation between 12
consultation within first
and 24
12 months
months
All locations Hospital One service One service
Inpatient or
Emergency
Department
All locations All locations One service
except
hospital
inpatient or
Emergency
Department
2. Consultations rendered to the same patient by the same consultant with a clearly defined
unrelated diagnosis are limited to one service every 12 months.
3. The amount payable for consultations will be adjusted to the amount payable for a general or
specific assessment, depending upon the specialty of the consultant where:
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP17 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 32 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSULTATIONS
a. consultations are in excess of the above limits;
b. the payment requirements of a repeat consultation are not met; or
c. the consultation is requested by a Medical Trainee.
Note:
1.The above limits are applicable to all consultations, including time-based and age-specific
consultation services (e.g. special, extended and comprehensive consultations) but not
repeat consultations.
2.In the preoperative preparation of a patient undergoing the following low risk elective surgical
procedures under local anaesthesia and/or I.V. sedation, a preoperative consultation by any
physician is only eligible for payment where the medical record demonstrates the
consultation is medically necessary.
a.cataract surgery;
b.colonoscopy;
c.cystoscopy;
d.carpal tunnel surgery; or
e.arthroscopic surgery.
[Commentary:
Such medically necessary consultations would be very uncommon.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP18 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 33 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
CONSULTATIONS
REPEAT CONSULTATION
Definition/Required elements of service:
A repeat consultation is an additional consultation rendered by the same consultant, in respect of the
same presenting problem, following care rendered to the patient by another physician in the interval
following the initial consultation but preceding the repeat consultation.
A repeat consultation has the same requirements as a consultation including the requirement for a
new written request by the referring physician, nurse practitioner or dental surgeon.
LIMITED CONSULTATION
Definition/Required elements of service:
A limited consultation is a consultation which is less demanding and, in terms of time, normally
requires substantially less of the physician’s time than the full consultation. Otherwise, a limited
consultation has the same requirements as a full consultation.
Under the heading of “Family Practice & Practice in General", a limited consultation is the service
rendered by any physician who is not a specialist, where the service meets all the requirements for a
consultation but, because of the nature of the referral, only those services which constitute a specific
assessment are rendered.
EMERGENCY ROOM (ER) PHYSICIAN CONSULTATION
Payment rules:
1. The amount payable for a consultation by an ER Physician will be adjusted to a lesser
assessment fee under either of the following circumstances:
a. the patient is referred by another ER physician in the same hospital; or
b. the service is rendered in any location other than the emergency department or other critical
care area in a hospital, or to a critically ill patient in a hospital.
2. ER reports constitute adequate documentation of the written report of the consultation as long
as the rendering of all constituent elements is clearly documented on all copies of the report. If
the consulting physician fails to ensure that a copy of the ER report is sent to the physician or
nurse practitioner who referred the patient, the amount payable for the service will be adjusted
to the amount payable for an assessment.
Claims submission instruction:
Claims for ER Physician consultations are to be submitted using H055 for a specialist in emergency
medicine (FRCP) and H065 for all other physicians.
SPECIAL SURGICAL CONSULTATION
Definition/Required elements of service:
A special surgical consultation is rendered when a surgeon provides all the appropriate elements of a
regular consultation and is required to devote at least fifty minutes exclusively to the consultation with
the patient.
[Commentary:
The calculation of the 50 minute minimum excludes time devoted to any other service or
procedure for which an amount is payable in addition to the consultation.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP19 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 34 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
CONSULTATIONS
Claims submission instruction:
Claims for special surgical consultations are to be submitted using either A935 or C935, as applicable.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP20 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 35 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
ASSESSMENTS
Specific requirements for assessments listed in the “Consultations and Visits” section of the Schedule
are set out below:
GENERAL ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A general assessment is a service, rendered at a place other than in a patient’s home that requires a
full history (the elements of which must include a history of the presenting complaint, family medical
history, past medical history, social history, and a functional inquiry into all body parts and systems),
and, except for breast, genital or rectal examination where not medically indicated or refused, an
examination of all body parts and systems, and may include a detailed examination of one or more
parts or systems.
Payment rules:
General assessments are limited to one per patient per physician per 12 month period unless either of
the following circumstances is met in which case the limit is increased to two per 12 month period:
1. the patient presents a second time with a complaint for which the diagnosis is clearly different
and unrelated to the diagnosis made at the time of the first general assessment; or
2. at least 90 days have elapsed since the date of the last general assessment and the second
assessment is a hospital admission assessment.
The amount payable for general assessments in excess of these limits will be adjusted to a lesser
assessment fee.
PERIODIC HEALTH VISIT
Definition: A periodic health visit (including a primary or secondary school examination) is performed
on a patient, after their second birthday, who presents and reveals no apparent acute physical or
mental illness. The service must include an intermediate assessment, a level 2 paediatric assessment
or a partial assessment focusing on age and gender appropriate history, physical examination, health
screening and relevant counselling.
Payment rules:
Periodic health visit is limited to one per patient per 12 month period per physician.
[Commentary:
Periodic health visits in excess of the limit are not insured.]
Claims submission instruction:
Submit claims for periodic health visits using the fee codes listed below.
No diagnostic code is required unless otherwise specifically listed.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP21 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 36 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Family Practice & Practice in General
Code Description
K017 child
K130 adolescent
K131 adult age 18 to 64 inclusive
K132 adult 65 years of age and older
K133 adult with Intellectual and Developmental
Disability (IDD)
Paediatrics
Code Description
K269 12 to 17 years
K267 2 to 11 years
GENERAL RE-ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A general re-assessment includes all the services listed for a general assessment, with the exception
of the patient’s history, which need not include all the details already obtained in the original
assessment.
Payment rules:
With the exception of general re-assessments rendered for hospital admissions, general re-
assessments are limited to two per 12 month period, per patient per physician. The amount payable
for general re-assessments in excess of this limit will be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP22 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 37 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
ASSESSMENTS
PRE-DENTAL/PRE-OPERATIVE ASSESSMENTS
[Commentary:
For Definition and terms and conditions see page A4.]
SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT AND MEDICAL SPECIFIC ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
Specific assessment and medical specific assessment are services rendered by specialists, in a place
other than a patient’s home, and require a full history of the presenting complaint and detailed
examination of the affected part(s), region(s), or system(s) needed to make a diagnosis, and/or
exclude disease, and/or assess function.
Payment rules:
Specific assessments or medical specific assessments are limited to one per patient per physician per
12 month period unless either of the following circumstances are met in which case the limit is
increased to two per patient per physician per 12 month period:
1. the patient presents a second time with a complaint for which a clearly different diagnosis is
made, unrelated to the diagnosis made at the time of the first specific assessment in that 12
month period; or
2. in the case of a medical specific assessment, at least 90 days have elapsed since the date of
the last specific assessment and the second assessment is a hospital admission assessment.
The amount payable for specific or medical specific assessments in excess of this limit will be
adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
In addition, any combination of medical specific assessments and complex medical specific re-
assessments (see below) are limited to 4 per patient per physician per 12 month period. The amount
payable for these services in excess of this limit will be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
SPECIFIC RE-ASSESSMENT AND MEDICAL SPECIFIC RE-ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
Specific re-assessment and medical specific re-assessment are services rendered by specialists and
require a full, relevant history and physical examination of one or more systems.
[Commentary:
As outlined on page GP40, admission assessments are deemed to be a specific re-
assessment or medical specific re-assessment under either of the following circumstances:
1.for those procedures prefixed with a “Z” or noted as an IOP, by a surgical specialist who has
assessed the patient prior to admission in respect of the same illness; or
2.for those patients who have been assessed by a physician and subsequently admitted to the
hospital for the same illness by the same physician.]
Payment rules:
Specific re-assessments or medical specific re-assessments are limited to two per patient per
physician per consecutive 12 month period except for specific re-assessments rendered for hospital
admissions. The amount payable for specific or medical specific re-assessments in excess of this limit
will be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP23 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 38 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
COMPLEX MEDICAL SPECIFIC RE-ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
A complex medical specific re-assessment is a re-assessment of a patient because of the complexity,
obscurity, or seriousness of the patient’s condition and includes all the requirements of a medical
specific re-assessment. The physician must report his/her findings, opinions, or recommendations in
writing to the patient’s primary care physician or the amount payable for the service will be adjusted to
a lesser assessment fee.
Payment rules:
Complex medical specific re-assessments are limited to 4 per patient per physician per 12 month
period. The amount payable for complex medical specific re-assessments in excess of this limit will be
adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
In addition, any combination of medical specific assessments and complex medical specific re-
assessments are limited to 4 per patient per physician per 12 month period. The amount payable for
these services in excess of this limit will be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP24 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 39 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
PARTIAL ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
A partial assessment is the limited service that constitutes a history of the presenting complaint, the
necessary physical examination, advice to the patient and appropriate record.
Chronic Disease Assessment Premium
Definition/ Required elements of service:
Chronic disease assessment premium is payable in addition to the amount payable for an
assessment when all of the following criteria are met:
a. The assessment is a
i. medical specific assessment;
ii. medical specific re-assessment;
iii. complex medical specific re-assessment;
iv. partial assessment; or
v. level 2 paediatric assessment
b. The service is rendered by a physician registered with OHIP as having one of the following
specialty designations:
07(Geriatrics), 15(Endocrinology & Metabolism), 18(Neurology), 26(Paediatrics),
28(Pathology), 31(Physical Medicine), 34(Therapeutic Radiology), 44(Medical Oncology),
46(Infectious Disease), 47(Respiratory Disease), 48(Rheumatology), 61(Haematology),
62(Clinical Immunology).
c. The assessment is rendered in an office setting or an out-patient clinic located in a hospital,
other than an emergency department.
[Commentary:
The chronic disease assessment premium is not payable for assessments rendered to in-
patients of any hospital, patients seen in a long-term care facility or patients seen in an
emergency department.]
d. The patient has an established diagnosis of a chronic disease, documented in the patient’s
medical record.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP25 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 40 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Payment rules:
The following is a list of the diagnostic codes as specified by OHIP that must accompany the claim for
payment purposes:
Diagnostic
Description
Code
042 AIDS
043 AIDS-related complex
044 Other human immunodeficiency virus infection
250 Diabetes mellitus, including complications
286 Coagulation defects (e.g. haemophilia, other factor deficiencies)
282 Hereditary hemolytic anemia (e.g., thalassemia, sickle-cell anemia)
287 Purpura, thrombocytopenia, other haemorrhagic conditions
290 Senile dementia, presenile dementia
299 Child psychoses or autism
313 Behavioural disorders of childhood and adolescence
315 Specified delays in development (e.g. dyslexia, dyslalia, motor retardation)
332 Parkinson's Disease
340 Multiple Sclerosis
343 Cerebral Palsy
345 Epilepsy
402 Hypertensive Heart Disease
428 Congestive Heart Failure
491 Chronic Bronchitis
492 Emphysema
493 Asthma, Allergic Bronchitis
515 Pulmonary Fibrosis
555 Regional Enteritis, Crohn's Disease
556 Ulcerative Colitis
571 Cirrhosis of the Liver
585 Chronic Renal Failure, Uremia
710 Disseminated Lupus Erythaematosus, Generalized Scleroderma, Dermatomyositis
714 Rheumatoid Arthritis, Still's Disease
720 Ankylosing Spondylitis
721 Other seronegative spondyloarthropathies
758 Chromosomal Anomalies
765 Prematurity, low-birthweight infant
902 Educational problems
[Commentary:
The chronic disease assessment premium is not payable in situations where the diagnosis has
not been established.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP26 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 41 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
LEVEL 1 PAEDIATRIC ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A Level 1 paediatric assessment includes one or both of the following:
a. a brief history and examination of the affected part or region or related to a mental or
emotional disorder; or
b. brief advice or information regarding health maintenance, diagnosis, treatment and/or
prognosis.
LEVEL 2 PAEDIATRIC ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A Level 2 paediatric assessment is a paediatric service that requires a more extensive examination
than a level 1 paediatric assessment. It requires a history of the presenting complaint(s), inquiry
concerning, and examination of the affected part(s), region(s), system(s), or mental or emotional
disorder as needed to make a diagnosis, exclude disease, and/or assess function.
A Level 2 paediatric assessment also includes well baby care, which is a periodic assessment of a
well newborn/infant during the first two years of life including complete examination with weight and
measurements, and instructions to the parent(s) or patient’s representative regarding health care.
INTERMEDIATE ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
An intermediate assessment is a primary care general practice service that requires a more extensive
examination than a minor assessment. It requires a history of the presenting complaint(s), inquiry
concerning, and examination of the affected part(s), region(s), system(s), or mental or emotional
disorder as needed to make a diagnosis, exclude disease, and/or assess function.
INTERMEDIATE ASSESSMENT – PRONOUNCEMENT OF DEATH
Definition/Required elements of service:
Intermediate assessment – pronouncement of death is the service of pronouncing a patient dead in a
location other than in the patient’s home. This service may include any counselling of relatives that is
rendered during the same visit, and completion of the death certificate.
[Commentary:
1.For pronouncement of death in the home, see house call assessments (page A4 of the
Schedule).
2.Submit the claim for this service using the diagnostic code for the underlying cause of death,
as recorded on the death certificate, rather than the immediate cause of death.]
MINOR ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A minor assessment includes one or both of the following:
a. a brief history and examination of the affected part or region or related to a mental or
emotional disorder; or
b. brief advice or information regarding health maintenance, diagnosis, treatment and/or
prognosis.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP27 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 42 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
PERIODIC OCULO-VISUAL ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A periodic oculo-visual assessment is an examination of the eye and vision system rendered primarily
to determine if a patient has a simple refractive error (defined as myopia, hypermetropia, presbyopia,
anisometropia or astigmatism) for patients aged 19 or less or aged 65 or more. This service includes
all components required to perform the assessment (ordinarily a history of the presenting complaint,
past medical history, visual acuity examination, ocular mobility examination, slit lamp examination of
the anterior segment, ophthalmoscopy, tonometry) advice and/or instruction to the patient and
provision of a written refractive prescription if required.
Payment rules:
1. This service is limited to one per patient per 12 month period regardless of whether the first
claim is or has been submitted for a service rendered by an optometrist or physician. Services
in excess of this limit or to patients aged 20 to 64 are not insured services.
2. Any other insured service rendered by the same physician (other than an ophthalmologist) to
the same patient the same day as a periodic oculo-visual assessment is not eligible for
payment.
[Commentary:
1.Other consultation and visit codes are not to be used as a substitute for this service when the
limit is reached.
2.Re-assessment following a periodic oculo-visual assessment is to be claimed using a lesser
assessment fee code and diagnostic code 367.]
FIRST VISIT BY PRIMARY CARE PHYSICIAN AFTER HOSPITAL DISCHARGE
E080 First visit after hospital discharge premium, to other service
listed in payment rule 5 below ..................................... add 25.25
Payment rules:
1.Subject to payment rules 2 through 5, E080 is only eligible for payment for a visit with the
patient's primary care physician in the physician’s office or the patient’s home within two
weeks of discharge following in-patient admission to an acute care hospital.
[Commentary:
This premium is not payable for visits rendered to patients in locations other than the
physician's office or patient's home. As such, the premium is not payable for services rendered
in places such as Nursing Homes, Homes for the Aged, chronic care hospitals, etc.]
2.E080 is not eligible for payment if the admission to hospital was for the purpose of obstetrical
delivery unless the mother required admission to an ICU during the hospital stay.
3.E080 is not eligible for payment if the admission to hospital was for the purpose of newborn
care unless the infant required admission to a NICU during the hospital stay.
4.E080 is not eligible for payment if the admission to hospital was for the purpose of performing
day surgery.
5.E080 is only eligible for payment when rendered with the following services:
A001, A003, A004, A007, A008, A261, A262, A263, A264, A888, A900, K004–K008, K013,
K014, K022, K023, K028-K030, K032, K033, K037, K623, P003, P004, P008.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP28 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 43 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
DETENTION
Definition/Required elements of service:
Detention is payable following another insured service when a physician is required to spend
considerable extra time in active treatment and/or monitoring of the patient to the exclusion of all other
work and in this section is based on full 15-minute time units. The specific elements are those for
assessments.
K001 Detention – per full quarter hour............................................. 21.10
Payment rules:
1. Detention is payable under the following circumstances:
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP29 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 44 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Minimum time required in
Service delivery of service before
detention is payable
minor, partial, multiple systems assessment, level 1 and level 2 30 minutes
paediatric assessment, intermediate assessment, focused practice
assessment or subsequent hospital visit
specific or general re-assessment 40 minutes
consultation, repeat consultation, specific or general assessment, 60 minutes
complex dermatology assessment, complex endocrine neoplastic
disease assessment, complex neuromuscular assessment,
complex physiatry assessment, complex respiratory assessment,
enhanced 18 month well baby visit, midwife or aboriginal midwife-
requested anaesthesia assessment, midwife or aboriginal midwife-
requested assessment, midwife or aboriginal midwife-requested
genetic assessment or optometrist-requested assessment
initial assessment-substance abuse, special community medicine 90 minutes
consultation, special family and general practice consultation,
special optometrist-requested assessment, special palliative care
consultation, special surgical consultation or midwife or aboriginal
midwife-requested special assessment
comprehensive cardiology consultation, comprehensive community 120 minutes
medicine consultation, comprehensive endocrinology consultation,
comprehensive family and general practice consultation,
comprehensive geriatric consultation, comprehensive infectious
disease consultation, comprehensive internal medicine
consultation, comprehensive midwife or aboriginal midwife-
requested genetic assessment, comprehensive nephrology
consultation, comprehensive respiratory disease consultation,
comprehensive physical medicine and rehabilitation consultation,
comprehensive rheumatology consultation, special paediatric
consultation, special genetic consultation or special neurology
consultation
extended comprehensive geriatric consultation, extended midwife 180 minutes
or aboriginal midwife-requested genetic assessment, extended
special genetic consultation, extended special paediatric
consultation, or paediatric neurodevelopmental consultation
2. Detention is not eligible for payment in conjunction with diagnostic procedures, obstetrics, and
those therapeutic procedures where the fee includes an assessment (e.g. non-IOP surgery).
3. Detention is not eligible for payment for time spent waiting.
4. For the purposes of calculation of time units payable for detention, the start time commences
after the minimum time required for the assessment or consultation listed in the table has
passed.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP30 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 45 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
5. K001 is not eligible for payment for same patient same day as A190, A191, A192 A195, A197,
A198, A695, A795 or A895.
Claims submission instructions:
Claims for detention are assessed by a medical consultant on an IC basis and require the
submission of a written explanation.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP31 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 46 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
DETENTION-IN-AMBULANCE
Definition/Required elements of service:
Detention-in-Ambulance is payable for constant attendance with a patient in an ambulance, to provide
all aspects of care to the patient. Time is calculated only for that period during which the physician is
in constant attendance with the patient in the ambulance. The service includes an initial examination
and ongoing monitoring of the patient’s condition and all interventions, except in those circumstances
in which the Schedule provides for separate or additional payment for the intervention.
K101 Ground ambulance transfer with patient per quarter hour or
part thereof ......................................................................... 42.10
K111 Air ambulance transfer with patient per quarter hour or part
thereof ................................................................................ 126.40
K112 Return trip without patient to place of origin following air or
ground ambulance transfer, per half hour or major part
thereof ................................................................................ 25.05
Claims submission instruction:
Claims for Detention-in-Ambulance are assessed by a medical consultant on an IC basis and require
the submission of a written explanation.
[Commentary:
K101 is not applicable to attendance in a vehicle other than an ambulance, in which case K001
may apply.]
DETENTION FOR THE TRANSPORT OF DONOR ORGANS
Definition/Required elements of service:
Detention for the Transport of Donor Organs is payable for time travelling to and from a donor centre
(excluding time spent in the donor centre) for the purpose of collecting and transporting to the
recipient hospital (a) donor organ(s), including fresh bone being harvested.
K102 Per quarter hour or part thereof (not eligible for payment with
K001).................................................................................. 20.20
Claims submission instruction:
Claims for Detention for the Transport of Donor Organs are assessed by a medical consultant on an
IC basis and require the submission of a written explanation.
[Commentary:
Claims will be adjudicated on the basis of the most time-efficient means of travel to and from a
donor centre.]
NEWBORN CARE
Definition/Required elements of service:
Newborn care is the routine care of a well newborn for up to the first ten days of life in hospital or
home and includes an initial general assessment and subsequent assessments, as may be indicated,
and instructions to the caregiver(s) regarding the newborn's health care.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP32 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 47 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Payment rules:
1. Newborn care is limited to a maximum of one per patient except when a well baby is transferred
to another hospital in which case the fee for newborn care may be payable to a physician at
both hospitals.
[Commentary:
An example where this is possible is if the transfer occurred because of the state of health of
the mother.]
2. Despite the requirement that to be eligible for a special visit premium the call be non-elective
(see GP65), a special visit premium is payable in addition to this service if a physician is
required to make an additional visit to the hospital outside of his or her normally scheduled
hospital rounds to facilitate discharge of the newborn the same day as the visit.
LOW BIRTH WEIGHT BABY CARE
Definition:
Low birth weight baby care is any assessment of a well newborn/infant weighing less than 2.5
kilograms at birth.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP33 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 48 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
WELL BABY CARE
Definition/Required elements of service:
Well baby care is a periodic assessment of a well newborn/infant during the first two years of life
including complete examination with weight and measurements, and instructions to the parent(s) or
patient’s representative regarding health care.
ENHANCED 18 MONTH WELL BABY VISIT
Definition/Required elements of service:
Enhanced 18 month well baby visit is the service rendered when a physician performs all of the
following in respect of a child from 17-24 months of age:
a. Those services defined as “well baby care”;
b. An 18 month age-appropriate developmental screen; and
c. Review with the patient’s parent/guardian, legal representative or other caregiver of a brief
standardized tool (completed by the patient’s parent/guardian, legal representative or other
caregiver) that aids the identification of children at risk of a developmental disorder.
Medical record requirements:
This service is eligible for payment only when, in addition to the medical record requirements
for well baby care, an 18 month age-appropriate developmental screen and concerns identified
from the review of the brief standardized tool with the parent/guardian, legal representative or
other caregiver are recorded in the patient’s permanent medical record.
[Commentary:
An example of an 18 month age-appropriate developmental screen would be that outlined in
the Rourke Baby Record and an example of a brief standardized tool completed by the parent/
guardian, legal representative or other caregiver that aids the identification of children at risk of
a developmental disorder would be the Nipissing District Developmental Screen or similar
parental questionnaire.]
PSYCHIATRIC ASSESSMENT UNDER THE MENTAL HEALTH ACT
Definition/Required elements of service:
A psychiatric assessment under the Mental Health Act (K620, K623, K624, and K629) includes such
psychiatric history, inquiry, and examination of the patient, as is appropriate, to enable the physician to
complete, and includes completing, the relevant forms and to notify the patient, family, patient
representative and relevant authorities under the Mental Health Act, where appropriate.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP34 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 49 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
E-Assessments
Definition/Required elements of service:
An e-assessment is a service performed by a specialist when a primary care physician or nurse
practitioner requests an opinion and/or recommendations from the specialist for management of a
specific patient by providing information electronically through a secure server (e.g. secure
messaging, EMR). The specialist is required to review all relevant data provided by the primary care
physician or nurse practitioner, including the review of any additional information that may be
submitted subsequent to the initial request. For the purpose of this service, “relevant data” may
include family/patient history, history of the presenting complaint, laboratory and diagnostic tests, and
visual images where indicated.
In addition to the Common Elements, E-assessments include the specific elements of assessments,
as listed in the General Preamble, except for paragraphs A and B.
Payment rules:
1.E-assessments are only eligible for payment if the specialist has provided an opinion and/or
recommendations for patient management to the primary care physician or nurse practitioner
within 30 days from the date of the request. Where a service is requested by a nurse
practitioner the consultant shall provide the report to the nurse practitioner and the patient’s
primary care provider, if applicable.
2.E-assessments are not eligible for payment to the specialist in the following circumstances
a.when the purpose of the electronic communication is to arrange for transfer of the
patient’s care to any physician; or
b.when rendered in whole or in part to arrange for a consultation, a different assessment,
visit, or K-prefix time-based services, procedure(s), or diagnostic investigation(s); or
c.when the specialist renders a K-prefix time-based service for the same patient within 30
days following the request for the specialist e-assessment; or
d.in circumstances where the primary care physician or specialist receives compensation,
other than by fee-for service under this Schedule, for participation in the e-assessment.
3.A consultation, a different assessment or visit rendered by the specialist for the same patient
for the same diagnosis within 60 days following the request for the specialist e-assessment is
only payable as a specific or partial assessment, as appropriate to the service rendered.
4.K738 is eligible for payment to the primary care physician when this physician is required to
collect additional data (for example dermatology or ophthalmology images not present in the
primary care physician’s records) to support the specialist’s e-assessment. K738 is not
eligible for payment where existing data is already available in the primary care physician’s
records for submission to the specialist.
[Commentary:
1.Following the primary care physician’s request, the specialist decides whether an e-
assessment is the most appropriate service in the circumstances. In some cases, direct
patient contact or a consultation by videoconference may be more appropriate.
2.Payment, other than by fee-for-service, includes compensation where the physician receives
remuneration under a salary, primary care, stipend, APP or AFP model.
3.Physicians who receive compensation other than by fee-for-service under this Schedule
should consult their contract for guidance on shadow-billing.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP35 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 50 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Medical record requirements:
An e-assessment is only eligible for payment if all of the following elements are included in the
patient’s permanent medical record of the specialist:
1.patient’s name and health number;
2.name of the primary care physician or nurse practitioner;
3.date of, and reason for, the request; and
4.opinion, diagnosis, advice and/or recommendations of the specialist.
Claims submission instructions:
An e-assessment is only eligible for payment if the specialist includes the primary care
physician’s or nurse practitioner’s provider number with the claim.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP36 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 51 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Initial E-ASSESSMENT
Definition/Required elements of service:
Initial e-assessment is the first e-assessment performed by a particular specialist that is requested by
the primary care physician or nurse practitioner for a specific patient and diagnosis where the
specialist must review all relevant data provided by the primary care physician and provide a written
opinion that includes a diagnosis and/or management advice to the primary care physician or nurse
practitioner.
[Commentary:
The time and intensity of this service is the same as a regular consultation. The specialist may
choose to return their opinion by phone, however, a written opinion must be provided
electronically or by mail.]
Payment rules:
Initial e-assessments are limited to a maximum of one per patient per specialist per 12 month
period unless the primary care physician or nurse practitioner makes a second request in
relation to a complaint for which a clearly different diagnosis is made, unrelated to the
diagnosis made at the time of the first e-assessment in that same 12 month period, in which
case the limit is increased to a maximum of two per patient per specialist per 12 month period.
[Commentary:
If a subsequent e-assessment is related to the diagnosis made at the time of the initial e-
assessment, then this service is payable as a repeat e-assessment, follow-up e-assessment or
minor e-assessment as appropriate to the service rendered.]
repeat E-ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
Repeat e-assessment is the first e-assessment performed by a particular specialist following an initial
e-assessment or consultation by that specialist that is requested by the primary care physician or
nurse practitioner for the same diagnosis where the specialist must review all relevant data provided
by the primary care physician or nurse practitioner and provide an opinion that includes management
advice to the primary care physician or nurse practitioner.
[Commentary:
The time and intensity of this service is the same as a specific assessment. The specialist may
choose to return their opinion by phone.]
Payment rules:
Repeat e-assessments are limited to a maximum of one per patient per physician per 12 month
period unless the primary care physician or nurse practitioner makes a second request in
relation to a complaint for which a clearly different diagnosis is made, unrelated to the
diagnosis made at the time of the first e- assessment in that same 12 month period, in which
case the limit is increased to a maximum of two per patient per physician per 12 month period.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP37 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 52 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
Follow-up E-ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
A follow-up e-assessment is the limited e-assessment rendered for follow-up by the specialist who
has previously rendered any insured service to the patient for the same diagnosis. The specialist must
review all relevant information submitted and provide an opinion and/or management advice to the
primary care physician or nurse practitioner.
[Commentary:
The time and intensity of the service is the same as a partial assessment. The specialist may
choose to return their opinion by phone.]
Payment rules:
Follow-up e-assessment is limited to a maximum of:
1.one (1) service per patient per day, same physician;
2.four (4) services per patient same physician per 12 month period; and
3.one thousand (1000) services per physician per 12 month period.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP38 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 53 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ASSESSMENTS
MINOR E-ASSESSMENT
Definition/ Required elements of service:
A minor e-assessment is a brief e-assessment rendered by the specialist. The specialist must review
all relevant information submitted and provide an answer to the primary care physician’s or nurse
practitioner’s specific clinical question.
Payment rules:
Minor e-assessment is limited to a maximum of:
1.one (1) service per patient per day, same physician;
2.twelve (12) services per patient same physician per 12 month period; and
3.two thousand (2000) services per physician per 12 month period.
[Commentary:
A minor e-assessment is where the primary care physician or nurse practitioner may ask a
specific question related to the patient where the information provided is limited and the
question asked is very specific. An example is where the primary care physician has initiated a
treatment recommended by the specialist, and the primary care physician requests a brief
email response related to proper dosing adjustments. One service may include multiple emails.
The specialist may choose to return their opinion by phone.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP39 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 54 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
ACUTE CARE HOSPITAL – NON-EMERGENCY IN-PATIENT SERVICES (“C” PREFIX
SERVICES)
A. Admission Assessment – General Requirements
Definition:
a. An admission assessment is the initial assessment of the patient rendered for the purpose
of admitting a patient to hospital.
b. The admitting physician is the physician who renders the admission assessment.
Payment rules:
1. Except as outlined below in paragraph 3, when the admitting physician has not previously
assessed the patient for the same presenting illness within 90 days of the admission
assessment, the admission assessment constitutes a consultation, general or medical specific
or specific assessment depending on the specialty of the physician, the nature of the service
rendered and any applicable payment rules.
2. Except as outlined below in paragraph 3, if the admitting physician has previously assessed the
patient for the same presenting illness within 90 days of the admission assessment, the
admission assessment constitutes a general re-assessment or specific re-assessment
depending on the specialty of the physician, the nature of the service rendered and any
applicable payment rules.
3. When a hospital in-patient is transferred from one physician to another physician, only one
consultation, general or specific assessment or reassessment is eligible for payment
per patient admission. The amount eligible for payment for services in excess of this limit will be
adjusted to a lesser assessment fee. An additional admission assessment is not eligible for
payment when a hospital inpatient is transferred from one physician to another physician within
the same hospital.
Admission Assessments by Specialists:
When a patient has been assessed by a specialist in the emergency room (ER) or out-patient
department (OPD) and that physician renders a service described as a consultation, specific
assessment, or medical specific assessment and subsequently admits the patient to hospital, the
initial consultation, specific, or medical specific assessment constitutes the admission assessment.
When a patient has been assessed by a specialist in the ER or OPD, and that physician renders any
other assessment other than those listed in the paragraph immediately above, and that physician
subsequently admits the patient to hospital, an admission assessment is eligible for payment in
addition to the initial assessment, if each service is rendered separately.
[Commentary:
In accordance with the surgical preamble, a hospital admission assessment by the surgeon is
not eligible for payment, unless it is the “major pre-operative visit” (i.e., the consultation or
assessment which may be claimed when the decision to operate is made and the operation is
scheduled).]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP40 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 55 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
Admission Assessments by General and Family Practitioners:
When a patient has been assessed by a general or family practitioner in the emergency room (ER) or
out-patient department (OPD) and that physician renders a service described as a consultation,
general assessment, or general re-assessment and subsequently admits the patient to hospital, the
initial consultation, general assessment, general re-assessment constitutes the admission
assessment.
When a patient has been assessed by a general or family practitioner in the ER or OPD and that
physician renders any other assessment other than those listed in the paragraph immediately above,
and subsequently admits the patient to hospital, an admission assessment is eligible for payment in
addition to the initial assessment, if each assessment is rendered separately.
Payment rules:
A933/C933/C003/C004 are not eligible for payment for an admission assessment for an elective
surgery patient when a pre-operative assessment has been rendered to the same patient within 30
days of admission by the same physician.
Admission Assessments by General and Family Practitioners in an Emergency
Department Funded under an Emergency Department Alternative Funding Agreement:
When a patient has been assessed by the patient's general or family practitioner in an emergency
room and that physician subsequently admits the patient to hospital, the General/Family Physician
Emergency Department Assessment constitutes the admission assessment if the physician remains
the most responsible physician for the patient.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP41 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 56 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
Admission Assessments by Emergency Physicians:
When a patient has been assessed by an emergency physician in the ER or OPD and that physician
renders a service described as a consultation, general assessment, or general re-assessment and
subsequently admits the patient to hospital as the most responsible physician or that physician is
asked to perform the admission assessment (even though the patient is admitted under a different
most responsible physician), the initial consultation, general assessment, or general re-assessment
constitutes the admission assessment.
When a patient has been assessed by an emergency physician in the ER or OPD and that physician
renders any other assessment other than those listed in the paragraph immediately above, and
subsequently renders the admission assessment, (even if the patient is admitted under a different
most responsible physician), the admission assessment is payable as C004, in addition to the initial
assessment, if both services are rendered separately.
Admission Assessment by the Most Responsible Physician (MRP) Premium
E082 Admission assessment by the MRP, to admission
assessment .......................................................... add 30%
Payment rules:
1.E082 is only eligible for payment once per patient per hospital admission.
2.E082 is only eligible for payment:
a.if the physician establishes that he or she does not receive any direct or indirect
remuneration from a hospital or hospital foundation for rendering in-patient clinical
services; or
b.where the physician receives any direct or indirect remuneration from a hospital or
hospital foundation for rendering in-patient clinical services, if the physician establishes
that such remuneration has been reduced by an amount equal to the amount that would
be eligible for payment to the physician had he or she not received any such direct or
indirect remuneration.
3.E082 is not eligible for payment for transfers within the same hospital.
4.E082 is not applicable to any other service or premium.
[Commentary:
1.E082 is only eligible for payment when the admitting physician is the MRP. If the MRP does
not render the admission assessment, E082 is not eligible for payment for any service
rendered by any physician during that hospital admission.
2.E082 is not eligible for payment for a patient admitted for obstetrical delivery or for a
newborn.
3.E082 is not applicable for any consultation or assessment related to day surgery.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP42 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 57 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
B. Subsequent Visit
Definition:
A subsequent visit is any routine assessment in hospital following the hospital admission assessment.
Attendance at Surgery: If, in the interest of the patient, the referring physician is asked to be
present by the patient or the patient’s representative, but does not assist at the procedure, the
attendance at surgery by the referring physician constitutes a hospital subsequent visit.
Multidisciplinary care: Except where a single service for a team of physicians is listed in this
Schedule (e.g. the weekly team fee for dialysis), when the complexity of the medical condition
requires the services of several physicians in different disciplines, each physician visit
constitutes a subsequent visit.
Payment rules:
1. Except in the circumstances outlined in paragraphs 2 and 3, or when a patient is referred from
one physician to another (see Claims submission instruction below), subsequent visits are
limited to one per patient, per day for the first 5 weeks after admission, 3 visits per week from 6
to 13 weeks after admission, and 6 visits per month after 13 weeks. Services in excess of the
limit are not eligible for payment.
2. After 5 weeks of hospitalization, any assessment in hospital required as a result of an acute
intercurrent illness in excess of the weekly or monthly limits set out above constitutes C121 –
“additional visit due to intercurrent illness”. The weekly or monthly limits set out above do not
apply to additional visits due to intercurrent illness.
3. Pediatric subsequent visits (C262) are limited to one per patient, per day for the duration of the
admission.
4. When a physician is already in the hospital and assesses one of his/her own patients or patients
transferred to his/her care, the service constitutes a subsequent visit. If a physician assesses
another physician’s patient on an emergency basis, the General Listings (“A” prefix) apply.
Claims submission instruction:
When a hospital in-patient is referred from one physician to another physician, the date the second
physician assessed the patient for the first time is considered the “admission date” for the purposes of
determining the appropriate subsequent visit fee code.
[Commentary:
When a hospital in-patient is transferred from one physician to another physician, subsequent
visits by the second physician are calculated based on the actual admission date of the
patient.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP43 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 58 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
C. Subsequent visit by the Most Responsible Physician (MRP)
Subsequent visit by the MRP – day following the hospital admission assessment (C122)
Definition:
Subsequent visit by the MRP - day following the hospital admission assessment is payable to the
physician identified as the patient’s MRP for rendering a subsequent visit on this day.
Subsequent visit by the MRP – second day following the hospital admission assessment
(C123)
Definition:
Subsequent visit by the MRP - second day following the hospital admission assessment is payable to
the physician identified as the patient’s MRP for rendering a subsequent visit on this day.
Payment rules:
1. C122, C123 are limited to a maximum of one each per hospital admission.
[Commentary:
C122, C123 are only payable for visits rendered by the MRP. Services rendered by physicians
who are not the MRP may be payable at a lesser visit fee.]
2. C122, C123 are not eligible for payment:
a. when rendered to the same patient the same day as C124 (Subsequent visit by the MRP -
day of discharge);
b. for a patient admitted for obstetrical delivery or newborn care; or
c. for any visit rendered by a surgeon during the 2 days prior to non-Z prefix surgery.
3. C122, C123 are not payable for a subsequent visit rendered by a surgeon to a hospital in-
patient following non-Z prefix surgery.
[Commentary:
The first and second post-operative visits by the surgeon to a hospital in-patient following non-
Z prefix surgery constitute post-operative visits payable at the appropriate specialty specific
subsequent visit fee.]
4. When a patient is transferred to another physician within the same hospital during either of
these days, C122 or C123 are only payable to the physician who was the MRP for the majority
of the day.
5. When a patient is transferred to another physician at a different hospital, the day of transfer shall
be deemed for payment purposes to be the day of admission.
6. Only one of C122 or C142 is eligible for payment for the same patient during the same hospital
admission. Only one of C123 or C143 is eligible for payment for the same patient during the
same hospital admission.
[Commentary:
For first and second subsequent visits by the MRP following transfer from an Intensive Care
Area (C142, C143), see General Preamble page GP46.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP44 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 59 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
Subsequent visit by the MRP - day of discharge (C124)
Definition/Required elements of service:
Subsequent visit by the MRP – day of discharge is payable to the physician identified as the MRP for
rendering a subsequent visit on the day of discharge, and, in addition, requires completion of the
discharge summary by the physician within 48 hours of discharge, arranging for follow-up of the
patient (as appropriate) and prescription of discharge medications if any.
The discharge summary must include as a minimum the following information:
a. reason for admission;
b. procedures performed during the hospitalization;
c. discharge diagnosis; and
d. medications on discharge.
Payment rules:
1.C124 is only payable to the MRP and limited to one service per hospital admission.
2.C124 is not eligible for payment under any of the following circumstances:
a.The patient was discharged within 48 hours of admission to hospital (calculated from the
actual date of admission to hospital);
b.The admission was for obstetrical delivery unless the mother required admission to an
ICU, with subsequent transfer and discharge from another unit within the hospital during
the hospital stay;
c.The admission was for newborn care unless the infant was admitted to a NICU, with
subsequent transfer and discharge from another unit within the hospital during the
hospital stay;
d.For transfers within the same hospital; or
e.For discharges directly from a NICU or ICU where NICU or ICU critical care per diem
services were rendered the same day.
[Commentary:
In the case of conflicting claims for this service, the physician to whom the patient has rostered
(virtual or actual) may receive the payment for the service.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP45 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 60 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
D. First subsequent visit by the MRP following transfer from an Intensive Care Area
First subsequent visit by the MRP following transfer from an Intensive Care Area (C142)
Definition:
First subsequent visit by the MRP following patient’s transfer from an Intensive Care Area (including
Neonatal Intensive Care) where the patient was receiving Critical Care, Ventilatory Support,
Comprehensive Care or Neonatal Intensive Care services immediately prior to the time of the transfer
to an acute care hospital bed in the same hospital.
Second subsequent visit by the MRP following transfer from an Intensive Care Area
(C143)
Definition:
Second subsequent visit by the MRP following patient’s transfer from an Intensive Care Area
(including Neonatal Intensive Care) where the patient was receiving Critical Care, Ventilatory Support,
Comprehensive Care or Neonatal Intensive Care services immediately prior to the time of the transfer
to an acute care hospital bed in the same hospital.
Payment rules:
1. C142, C143 are limited to a maximum of one each per hospital admission.
[Commentary:
1.C142, C143 are only payable for visits rendered by the MRP. Services rendered by
physicians who are not the MRP may be eligible for payment at a lesser visit fee.
2.C142 or C143 are not eligible for payment for visits rendered to patients who were in an
Intensive Care Area only for monitoring purposes.]
2. C142, C143 are not eligible for payment to the same physician who rendered Critical Care,
Ventilatory Support, Comprehensive Care or Neonatal Intensive Care services prior to the
patient’s transfer.
3. Only one of C122 or C142 is eligible for payment for the same patient during the same hospital
admission. Only one of C123 or C143 is eligible for payment for the same patient during the
same hospital admission.
[Commentary:
For Subsequent visit by the MRP – first and second day following the hospital admission
assessment (C122, C123), see General Preamble page GP44.]
4. C142, C143 are not eligible for payment:
a. when rendered to the same patient the same day as C124 (Subsequent visit by the MRP –
day of discharge), or
b. for any visit rendered by a surgeon during the 2 days prior to non-Z prefix surgery.
5. C142, C143 are not payable for visits rendered by a surgeon to a hospital in-patient in the first
two weeks following non-Z prefix surgery.
[Commentary:
The first and second post-operative visits by the surgeon to a hospital in-patient following non-
Z prefix surgery constitute post-operative visits payable at the appropriate specialty specific
subsequent visit fee.]
6. When a patient is transferred to another physician within the same hospital, C142 or C143 are
only payable to the physician who was the MRP for the majority of the day of the transfer.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP46 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 61 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
E. Subsequent visit and palliative care visit by the MRP premium
E083 Subsequent visit by the MRP, to subsequent visits and C122,
C123, C124, C142, C143, C882 or C982............. add 30%
E084 Saturday, Sunday or Holiday subsequent visit by the MRP, to
subsequent visits and C122, C123, C124, C142, C143,
C882 or C982.......................................................Add 45%
Payment rules:
1.E084 is only eligible for payment for subsequent visits provided on Saturdays, Sundays and
holidays.
2.Only one of E083 or E084 is eligible for payment per patient per day.
3.E084 is only eligible for payment when the MRP is from one of the following specialties: 00
(Family Practice and Practice in General), 02 (Dermatology), 07 (Geriatrics), 11 (Critical Care
Medicine), 12 (Emergency Medicine), 13 (Internal Medicine),15 (Endocrinology &
Metabolism), 16 (Nephrology), 18 (Neurology), 19 (Psychiatry), 22 (Genetics), 26
(Paediatrics), 28 (Pathology), 31 (Physical Medicine), 34 (Radiation Oncology), 41
(Gastroenterology), 44 (Medical Oncology), 46 (Infectious Disease), 47 (Respiratory
Disease), 48 (Rheumatology), 60 (Cardiology), 61 (Haematology), 62 (Clinical Immunology).
4.E083 or E084 are only eligible for payment:
a.if the physician establishes that he or she does not receive any direct or indirect
remuneration from a hospital or hospital foundation for rendering in-patient clinical
services; or
b.where the physician receives any direct or indirect remuneration from a hospital or
hospital foundation for rendering in-patient clinical services, if the physician establishes
that such remuneration has been reduced by an amount equal to the amount that would
be eligible for payment to the physician had he or she not received any such direct or
indirect remuneration.
5.E083 or E084 are not eligible for payment for palliative care visits to patients in designated
palliative care beds in Long-Term Care Institutions.
6.E083 or E084 are not applicable to any other service or premium.
[Commentary:
1.E083 or E084 are only eligible for payment with subsequent visits and palliative care visits
rendered by the MRP.
2.Examples of subsequent visits eligible for payment with E083 are C002, C007, C009, C132,
C137, C139, C032, C037 or C039. Examples of subsequent visits eligible for payment with
E084 are C002, C007, C009, C132, C137, C139, C152, C157 or C159.
3.E083 or E084 are not eligible for payment with C121 additional visits for intercurrent illness.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP47 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 62 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
F. Concurrent Care
Definition/Required elements of service:
Concurrent care is any routine assessment rendered in hospital by the consultant following the
consultant’s first major assessment of the patient when the family physician remains the most
responsible physician but the latter requests continued directive care by the consultant.
Payment rules:
Claims for concurrent care are limited to 4 per week during the first week of concurrent care, and 2
claims per week thereafter. Services in excess of this limit are not eligible for payment.
G. Supportive Care
Definition:
Supportive care is any routine visit rendered in hospital by the family physician who is not actively
treating the case where:
a. the patient is under the care of another physician;
b. the supportive care is rendered at the request of the patient or family; and
c. the care is provided for purposes of liaison or reassurance.
Payment rules:
Claims for supportive care are limited to 4 per week during the first week of supportive care,
determined from the date of the first supportive visit, and 2 claims per week thereafter. Services in
excess of this limit are not eligible for payment.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP48 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 63 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
LONG-TERM CARE INSTITUTION: NON-EMERGENCY IN-PATIENT SERVICES
("W" PREFIX SERVICES)
These services apply to patients in chronic care hospitals, convalescent hospitals, nursing homes,
homes for the aged and designated chronic or convalescent care beds in hospitals other than patients
in designated palliative care beds - “W” prefix services.
A. Admission Assessment
Type 1 Admission Assessment
Definition/Required elements of service:
A Type 1 admission assessment is a general assessment rendered to a patient on admission.
Payment rules:
If the physician has rendered a consultation, general assessment, or general re-assessment of the
patient prior to admission, the amount payable for the service will be adjusted to a lesser fee.
Type 2 Admission Assessment
Definition/Required elements of service:
A Type 2 admission assessment occurs when the admitting physician makes an initial visit to assess
the condition of the patient following admission and has previously rendered a consultation, general
assessment or general re-assessment of the patient prior to admission.
Type 3 Admission Assessment
Definition/Required elements of service:
A Type 3 admission assessment is a general re-assessment of a patient who is re-admitted to the
long-term care institution after a minimum 3 day stay in another institution.
B. Subsequent Visit
Definition:
A subsequent visit is any routine assessment following the patient’s admission to a long-term care
institution.
Payment rules:
Claims for these subsequent visits are subject to the limits described with each individual service as
found under the applicable specialty in the Consultations and Visits section.
Claims submission instructions:
1. Submit claims for acute intercurrent illnesses requiring visits other than special visits using
W121. When acute intercurrent illness requires a special visit, submit claims using the
appropriate fees under General Listings (“A” prefix) and premiums.
[Commentary:
Claims for W121 are payable for visits for acute intercurrent illness whenever rendered. Such
claims are not dependent on whether the monthly limit on the number of subsequent visits has
been reached.]
2. When a physician is already in the institution and is asked to assess one of his/her own in-
patients, the subsequent visit listings (“W” prefix) apply. However, if he/she is already in the
institution and asked to assess another physician’s patient on an emergency basis, submit
claims using the General Listings (“A” prefix).
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP49 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 64 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT - “H” PREFIX EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT SERVICES
For the purpose of emergency department – “H” prefix emergency department services:
“Hospital Urgent Care Clinic” means a clinic operated by a hospital corporation that provides services
similar to some or all of those provided by an emergency department but that is open to the public for
less than 24 hours in any given 24 hour period.
"Emergency Department Physician" means a physician:
a. working in a hospital emergency department specifically for the purpose of rendering
services to unscheduled patients who attend the emergency department to receive
physician services; or
b. working in a Hospital Urgent Care Clinic specifically for the purpose of rendering services to
unscheduled patients who attend the Hospital Urgent Care Clinic to receive physician
services.
There are specific “H” prefix listings (H1 – codes) for consultations, multiple systems assessments,
minor assessments, comprehensive assessment and care and re-assessments rendered by the
Emergency Department Physician. With the exception of the consultation fee (where a specific fee
code exists for a specialist in emergency medicine), any physician on duty (regardless of specialty) in
the emergency department must submit using these listings.
The “H” prefix listings under the heading, “Emergency Department Physician” on pages A12, A13 in
the Consultations and Visits section of the Schedule, apply in the following circumstances:
a. when a full- or part-time Emergency Department Physician is working for a
pre-arranged designated period of time or shift; or
b. for services rendered by an on-call physician where the service does not qualify for claiming
a special visit premium.
PALLIATIVE CARE ASSESSMENT
Definition: A palliative care assessment is any routine assessment rendered by the most
responsible physician for the purpose of providing palliative care to a patient other than one in a
designated palliative care bed at the time the assessment was rendered.
Claims submission instruction:
Submit claims for palliative care visits, other than those in designated palliative care beds, using the
appropriate "C" or "W" prefix palliative care fee schedule codes.
[Commentary:
1.Palliative care visits to patients in designated palliative care beds, regardless of facility type,
are to be claimed using C882 or C982, as applicable.
2.Services rendered to patients whose unexpected death occurs after prolonged hospitalization
for another diagnosis unrelated to the cause of death do not constitute palliative care
assessments.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP50 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 65 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
MONTHLY MANAGEMENT OF A NURSING HOME OR HOME FOR THE AGED PATIENT
Definition/Required Elements of Service:
Monthly Management of a Nursing Home or Home for the Aged Patient is the provision by the most
responsible physician (MRP) of routine medical care, management and supervision of a patient in a
nursing home or home for the aged for one calendar month. The service requires a minimum of two
assessments of the patient each month, where these assessments constitute services described as
"W" prefix assessments.
The requirements above are subject to the exceptions as described in payment rule #8.
[Commentary:
As with all services described as assessments, direct physical encounter with the patient is
required.]
In addition to the common elements, this service includes the provision of the following services by
any physician to the same patient during the month.
A. Services described by subsequent visits (e.g. W003, W008).
B. Services described by additional visits due to “intercurrent illness” (W121) except if the conditions
described in Payment rule #7 are satisfied.
C. Services described by palliative care subsequent visits (e.g. W872).
D. Services described by admission assessments (e.g. W102, W104, W107).
E. Services described by pre-dental/pre-operative assessments (e.g. W903).
F. Services described by periodic health visit or general re-assessments (e.g. W109, W004).
G. Services described by visit for pronouncement of death (W777) or certification of death (W771)
except if the services are performed in conjunction with a special visit.
H. Service described by anticoagulation supervision (G271).
I. Completion of CCAC application and home care supervision (K070, K071, K072).
J. Services described by the following diagnostic and therapeutic procedures – venipuncture (G489),
injection (G372, G373), immunization (G538, G590), collection of cervical cancer screening
specimen(s) (G365, G394, E430, E431), intravenous (G379), and laboratory test codes (G001,
G002, G481, G004, G005, G009, G010, G011, G012, G014).
K. All medication reviews.
L. All discussions with the staff of the institution related to the patient’s care.
M.All telephone calls from the staff of the institution, patient, patient’s relative(s) or patient’s
representative in respect of the patient between the hours of 0700 hours and 1700 hours Monday
to Friday (excluding holidays).
N. Ontario Drug Benefit Limited Use prescriptions/forms or Section 8 Ontario Drug Benefits Act
requests.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP51 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 66 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
MONTHLY MANAGEMENT OF A NURSING HOME OR HOME FOR THE AGED PATIENT
Payment rules:
1. Except as outlined in payment rule #8, this service is only eligible for payment once per patient
per calendar month.
2. This service is only eligible for payment to the MRP.
3. When W010 is rendered, none of the services listed as a component of W010 and rendered to
the patient by any physician during the month are eligible for payment.
4. In the temporary absence of the patient’s MRP (e.g. while that physician is on vacation), W010
remains payable to the patient’s MRP if the service is performed by another physician.
5. In the event the MRP renders one "W" prefix assessment in a calendar month and the same
physician has rendered W010 to that patient within the previous 11-month period, only that "W"
prefix assessment in that month is eligible for payment.
6. In the event the MRP renders two, three or four “W” prefix assessments in a calendar month
and the same physician has rendered W010 to that patient within the previous 11-month period,
only W010 is eligible for payment.
7. In the event the MRP renders more than four “W” prefix assessments to the same patient in a
month and the same physician has rendered W010 to that patient within the previous 11-month
period, any subsequent visits for intercurrent illness rendered by the MRP to the same patient in
excess of four in a month are payable as W121 in addition to payment of W010.
8. Despite the definition set out above, the requirements of W010 are met when less than two "W"
prefix assessments were rendered during the month and/or when the patient was not in the
institution for a full calendar month if:
a. a patient was newly admitted to the institution and an admission assessment was rendered;
or
b. in the event of the death of a patient while in the institution or within 48 hours of transfer to
hospital.
9. Age related premiums otherwise applicable to any component service of W010 are not eligible
for payment in addition to W010.
Claims submission instructions:
1. Claims for W010 may be submitted when the minimum required elements of the service have
been rendered for the month.
[Commentary:
a.Payment for W010 is for mangement of the patient for the entire month for all the services
listed as components of the W010 service, regardless of when the claim for W010 is
submitted.
b.When claiming W010, do not also submit claims for "W" prefix services listed as
components of the W010 for the same month.]
2. The admission date of the patient must be provided on the claim for W010 or the service is not
eligible for payment.
a. Submit claims for W121 which meet the requirements outlined in payment rule #7 using the
manual review indicator.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP52 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 67 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
HOSPITAL AND INSTITUTIONAL CONSULTATIONS AND ASSESSMENTS
[Commentary:
Examples of services not included in the Monthly Management fee include:
a.visits which qualify for a special visit premium.
b.services described under interviews, psychotherapy or counselling with the patient,
patient’s relative(s) or patient’s representative lasting 20 or more minutes and where all
other criteria for these services are met.
c.services described as physician to physician telephone consultations.
d.services rendered by a specialist who is not the MRP or who is not replacing an absent
MRP.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP53 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 68 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
PSYCHOTHERAPY, PSYCHIATRIC AND COUNSELLING SERVICES
SPECIFIC ELEMENTS
In addition to the common elements, all Psychotherapy, Hypnotherapy, Counselling, Primary Mental
Health, and Psychiatric Care include the following specific elements.
A. Performing the appropriate therapy or interaction (described below) with the patient(s) or, in the
case of K014, K015, and H313, the patient’s relative(s) or patient’s representative, which may
include the appropriate inquires (including obtaining a patient history, and a brief physical
examination) carried out in order to arrive at an opinion as to the nature of the patient’s condition
(whether such inquiry takes place before, during or after the encounter during which the therapy or
other interaction takes place); any appropriate procedure(s), related service(s), and/or follow-up
care.
B. Performing any procedure(s) during the same encounter as the therapy or other interaction unless
the procedure(s) is(are) separately listed in the Schedule and an amount is payable for the
procedure in conjunction with the therapy or interaction.
C. Making arrangements for any related assessments, procedures, or therapy.
D. Making arrangements for follow-up care.
E. Discussion with, and providing advice and information, including prescribing therapy to the patient
or the patient’s representative, whether by telephone or otherwise, on matters related to:
a. the service; and
b. in circumstances in which it would be professionally appropriate that results can be reported
upon prior to any further patient visit, the results of related procedure(s) and/or
assessment(s).
F. When medically indicated, monitoring the condition of the patient and intervening, until the next
insured service is rendered.
G. Providing premises, equipment, supplies, and personnel for the specific elements of the service.
While no occasion may arise for performing elements B, C, D and F, when performed in connection
with the other specific elements they are included in the service.
Payment rules:
1. These services are calculated and payable in time units of 30 minute increments. In calculating
the time unit(s), the minimum time required in direct contact with the patient (or patient’s relative
or patient’s representative as the case may be) and the physician in person is as follows:
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP54 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 69 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
PSYCHOTHERAPY, PSYCHIATRIC AND COUNSELLING SERVICES
# Units Minimum Time with Patient
1 unit 20 minutes
2 units 46 minutes
3 units 76 minutes [1h 16m]
4 units 106 minutes [1h 46m]
5 units 136 minutes [2h 16m]
6 units 166 minutes [2h 46m]
7 units 196 minutes [3h 16m]
8 units 226 minutes [3h 46m]
2. Except for in-patient individual psychotherapy by a psychiatrist or in-patient individual
psychiatric care for which the time can be consecutive or non-consecutive, for all other services
in this section the time units must be calculated based upon consecutive time spent rendering
the service.
3. Psychotherapy performed outside a hospital, psychiatric care, primary mental health care, or
hypnotherapy rendered the same day as a consultation or other assessment by the same
physician to the same patient is not eligible for payment unless there are clearly defined
different diagnoses for the two services.
[Commentary:
Except as noted in payment rule #2 (where non-consecutive services can be cumulated),
services less than 20 minutes do not constitute any of the services defined in this section and
constitute the type of assessment rendered in the circumstances.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP55 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 70 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
PSYCHOTHERAPY, PSYCHIATRIC AND COUNSELLING SERVICES
PSYCHOTHERAPY/FAMILY PSYCHOTHERAPY
Definition:
Psychotherapy is any form of treatment for mental illness, behavioural maladaptations, and/or other
problems that are assumed to be of an emotional nature, where a physician deliberately establishes a
professional relationship with a patient with the purpose of removing, modifying or retarding existing
symptoms, or attenuating or reversing disturbed patterns of behaviour, and of promoting positive
personality growth and development.
Family psychotherapy is psychotherapy rendered to the patient in the presence of one or more
members of the patient’s household.
Payment rules:
1. Psychotherapy is not eligible for payment when rendered on the same day to the same patient
by the same physician as obstetrical delivery.
2. Subsequent visits rendered by the same psychiatrist to the same patient on the same day as in-
patient individual psychotherapy are not eligible for payment.
PSYCHIATRIC CARE/FAMILY PSYCHIATRIC CARE/PRIMARY MENTAL HEALTH CARE
Definition:
Psychiatric care/family psychiatric care/primary mental health care are services encompassing any
combination or form of assessment and treatment by a physician for mental illness, behavioural
maladaptations, and/or other problems that are assumed to be of an emotional nature, where there is
consideration of the patient’s biological and psychosocial functioning.
Family psychiatric care is psychiatric care of the patient carried out by the physician in the presence of
one or more family members or in the presence of professional caregivers not on staff at the facility
where the patient is receiving the care.
Payment rules:
Subsequent visits rendered by the same psychiatrist to the same patient on the same day as
individual in-patient psychiatric care are not eligible for payment.
FOCUSED PRACTICE PSYCHOTHERAPY PREMIUM
The focused practice psychotherapy premium is payable automatically to an eligible physician subject
to the definitions and rules described below.
Definitions:
"Qualifying services" means K004A, K006A, K007A, K010A, K012A, K019A, K020A, K024A K025A,
K122A and K123A.
"Fiscal year" means April 1 - March 31st.
"Qualifying year" means the fiscal year preceding the date of determination of eligibility.
"Date of determination of eligibility" means the date upon which the General Manager determines that
the conditions for payment in (1) or (2) below, have been met.
"All payments" means all payments made to the physician for insured services listed in this Schedule
other than payments made for insured services listed in this Schedule for which a technical fee is
payable.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP56 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 71 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
PSYCHOTHERAPY, PSYCHIATRIC AND COUNSELLING SERVICES
Payment rules:
For the 12 month period following the date of determination of eligibility for the premium, the amount
payable to a physician shall be automatically increased by 17% for each of the following services
rendered by the physician: K004, K006, K007, K010, K012, K019, K020, K024, and K025, in the
following circumstances:
1. when the sum of all payments made to the physician for the qualifying services rendered in the
qualifying year exceeds 50% of the sum of all payments made to the physician in the qualifying
year; or
2. when the sum of all payments made to the physician for the qualifying services rendered in the
qualifying year is at least 40% but not more than 49% of the sum of all payments made to the
physician in the qualifying year and the requirements set out in (1.) were met by the physician in
respect of the fiscal year preceding the qualifying year.
[Commentary:
While K122 and K123 are qualifying services for the purpose of determining eligibility for the
focused practice psychotherapy premium, the premium is not payable for K122 and K123.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP57 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 72 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
PSYCHOTHERAPY, PSYCHIATRIC AND COUNSELLING SERVICES
HYPNOTHERAPY
Definition:
Hypnotherapy is a form of treatment that has the same goals as psychotherapy but is rendered with
the patient under hypnosis.
Payment rules:
Hypnotherapy is not eligible for payment when rendered on the same day to the same patient by the
same physician as obstetrical delivery.
COUNSELLING
Definition/Required elements of service:
Counselling is a patient visit dedicated solely to an educational dialogue with a physician. This service
is rendered for the purpose of developing awareness of the patient’s problems or situation and of
modalities for prevention and/or treatment, and to provide advice and information in respect of
diagnosis, treatment, health maintenance and prevention.
[Commentary:
1.Advice given to a patient that would ordinarily constitute part of a consultation, assessment,
or other treatment, is included as a common or constituent element of the other service, and
does not constitute counselling.
2.Detention time may be payable following a consultation or assessment when a physician is
required to spend considerable extra time in treatment or monitoring of the patient. See
GP29 for further information.]
Payment rules:
1. With the exception of the codes listed in the below, no other services are eligible for payment
when rendered by the same physician the same day as any type of counselling service:
E080, G010, G039, G040, G041, G042, G043, G202, G205, G365, G372, G384, G385, G394,
G462, G480, G489, G482, G538, G590, G593, G840, G841, G842, G843, G844, G845, G846,
G847, G848, H313, K002, K003, K008, K014, K015, K031, K035, K036, K038, K682, K683,
K684, K730
2. Individual and group counselling services are limited to 3 units per patient per physician per
year at the higher fee (K013 or K040 respectively); the amount payable for services rendered in
excess of this limit will be adjusted to a lesser fee (K033 or K041 respectively).
3. If the patient does not have a pre-booked appointment, the amount payable for this service will
be adjusted to a lesser assessment fee.
A. Individual Counselling
Definition:
Individual counselling is counselling rendered to a single patient.
B. Group Counselling
Definition:
Group Counselling is counselling rendered to two or more patients with a similar medical condition or
situation.
Payment rules:
1. Group counselling is only eligible for payment when all of the following conditions are fulfilled:
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP58 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 73 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
PSYCHOTHERAPY, PSYCHIATRIC AND COUNSELLING SERVICES
a. The group counselling is pre-booked; and
b. When there is an ongoing physician-patient relationship.
2. In addition to meeting the usual medical record requirements for the service, the physician must
also maintain a separate record (independent of the patient’s medical record) of the names and
health numbers of all persons in attendance at each group counselling session or the service is
not eligible for payment.
Claims submission instruction:
The claim must be submitted under the health number of the group member for whom, when the
service was rendered, the largest number of counselling units had previously been claimed by the
physician during the year in which the service is rendered.
[Commentary:
Group counselling does not apply to lectures.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP59 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 74 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
PSYCHOTHERAPY, PSYCHIATRIC AND COUNSELLING SERVICES
C. Transplant Counselling
Definition/Required elements of service:
Transplant counselling is payable in circumstances where transplant or donation is imminent, for the
purpose of providing the recipient, donor or family member with adequate information and clinical data
to enable that person to make an informed decision regarding organ transplantation.
Claims submission instruction:
The claim must be submitted under the health number of the recipient or donor.
D. Counselling of Relatives on Behalf of a Catastrophically or Terminally Ill Patient
Definition:
Counselling of relatives on behalf of a catastrophically or terminally ill patient is counselling rendered
to a relative or relatives or representative of a catastrophically or terminally ill patient, for the purpose
of developing an awareness of modalities for treatment of the patient and/or his or her prognosis.
Claims submission instruction:
The claim must be submitted under the health number of the patient who is catastrophically or
terminally ill.
E. Rehabilitation Counselling
Definition:
Rehabilitation counselling is counselling rendered for the purpose of developing an awareness of the
modalities for treatment of the patient and/or his or her prognosis.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP60 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 75 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
INTERVIEWS
SPECIFIC ELEMENTS
In addition to the common elements, all services described as interviews include the following specific
elements.
A. Obtaining information from, engaging in discussion with, and providing advice and information to
interviewee(s) on matters related to the patient’s condition and care.
B. Providing premises, equipment, supplies and personnel for the specific elements of the service.
Payment rules:
1. These services are calculated and payable in time units of 30 minute increments. In calculating
the time unit(s), the minimum time required in direct contact with the patient (or patient’s relative
or patient’s representative as the case may be) and the physician in person is as follows:
# Units Minimum time
1 unit: 20 minutes
2 units: 46 minutes
3 units: 76 minutes [1h 16m]
4 units: 106 minutes [1h 46m]
5 units: 136 minutes [2h 16m]
6 units: 166 minutes [2h 46m]
7 units: 196 minutes [3h 16m]
8 units: 226 minutes [3h 46m]
[Commentary:
1.Services less than 20 minutes in duration do not constitute any of the services defined in this
section and constitute the type of assessment rendered in the circumstances.
2.Inquiry, discussion or provision of advice or information to a patient, patient’s relative or
representative that would ordinarily constitute part of a consultation, assessment (including
those services which are defined in terms of an assessment) is included as a common or
constituent element of the other service, and does not constitute an interview.]
2. If an appointment for the interview is not separately booked, the amount payable for this service
will be adjusted to a lesser fee.
3. All services described as interviews must be rendered personally by the attending physician or
they become uninsured services.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP61 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 76 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DELEGATED PROCEDURE
Definition:
The term “procedure” as it is used in this section does not include services such as assessments,
consultations, psychotherapy, counselling etc.
Payment rules:
1. Where a procedure is performed by a physician’s employee(s) in the physician’s office, the
service remains insured using the existing fee codes if all the following requirements are met:
a. the procedure is one which is generally and historically accepted as a procedure which may
be carried out by the nurse or other medical assistant in the employ of the physician; and
b. subject to the exceptions set out below, at all times during the procedure, the physician
(although he or she may be otherwise occupied), is:
i. physically present in the office or clinic at which the service is rendered in order to
ensure that procedures are being performed competently; and
ii. available immediately to approve, modify or otherwise intervene in a procedure, as
required, in the best interests of the patient.
2. Exceptions to the requirement for physician presence during the delegated procedure.
Where all of the following conditions are met, the simple office procedures listed in the table
below remain insured despite the physician not being physically present:
a. the non-physician performing the procedure is properly trained to perform the procedure, he/
she reports to the physician, and the procedure is rendered in accordance with accepted
professional standards and practice;
b. the procedure is performed only on the physician’s own patient, as evidenced by either an
ongoing physician/patient relationship or a consultation/assessment rendered by the
physician to the patient on the same day as the procedure is performed; and
c. the same medical record requirements must be met as if the physician personally had
rendered the service. The record must be dated, identify the non-physician performing the
service, and contain a brief note on the procedure performed by the non-physician.
Claims submission instruction:
A locum tenens replacing an absent physician in the absent physician’s office may submit claims for
delegated procedures under either his/her own billing number or the billing number of the physician
he/she is replacing.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP62 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 77 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DELEGATED PROCEDURE
COMMON
APPLICABLE FEE CURRENT PAGE
PROCEDURAL
CODES #
DESCRIPTION
Venipuncture G480, G482, G489 J7
Injections and G372, G373, G538, G590, J55
immunizations G593, G840, G841, G842,
G843, G844, G845, G846,
G847, G848
Ultraviolet light therapy G470 J37
Administration of oral G462 J55
polio vaccine
Simple office G001, G002, G004, G005, J68
laboratory procedures G009, G010, G011, G012,
G014, G481
Ear syringing, G420 J98
curetting or
debridement
B.C.G. inoculation G369 J54
Simple Spirometry and J301, J324, J304, J327 H4
Flow Volume Loop
Casts Z198-Z209, Z211, Z213, N7
Z216, Z873
[Commentary:
Claims for services delegated to an individual employed by the physician submitting the claim
are payable by OHIP. Claims are not payable for delegated services provided by an individual
who is employed by a facility or organization such as a public hospital, public health unit,
industrial clinics, long-term care facilities or Family Health Teams.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP63 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 78 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
AGE-BASED FEE PREMIUMS
1. Despite any other provision in this Schedule, the amount payable for the following services to
an insured person who falls into the age group described in the Age Group column of the
following Age Premium Table is increased by the percentage specified in Percentage Increase
column opposite the Age Group:
a. A consultation, limited consultation or repeat consultation rendered by a specialist, as those
services are defined in this Schedule.
b. A surgical procedure listed in Parts K to Z inclusive of this Schedule.
c. Basic and time unit surgical assistant services listed in Parts K to Z inclusive of this
Schedule.
d. Clinical Procedures associated with Diagnostic Radiological Examinations.
e. A specific assessment or a partial assessment rendered by a specialist in ophthalmology
(23) (A233 or A234).
age premium table
Percentage
Item Age Group
Increase
1 Less than 30 days of 30%
age
2 At least 30 days but 25%
less than one year of
age
3 At least one year but 20%
less than two years of
age
4 At least two years but 15%
less than five years of
age
5 At least five years but 10%
less than 16 years of
age
2. Despite any other provision in this Schedule, the amount payable for the following services to
an insured person who is at least 65 years of age, as those services are defined in this
Schedule, is increased by 15 per cent:
a. A general assessment (A003, C003, C903, W102, W109 or W903);
b. A general re-assessment (A004, C004, W004);
c. An intermediate assessment (A007);
d. A focused practice assessment (A917, A927, A937, A947, A957 or A967);
e. A periodic health visit (K132).
f. Comprehensive assessment and care (H102, H122, H132, H152)
g. A multiple systems assessment (H103, H123, H133, H153)
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP64 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 79 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
Special visit means a visit initiated by a patient or an individual on behalf of the patient for the purpose
of rendering a non-elective service or, if rendered in the patient's home, a non-elective or elective
service.
A special visit premium is payable in respect of a special visit rendered to an insured person, subject
to the conditions and limitations set out below. All special visit premiums are subject to the maximums,
limitations and conditions set out in the "Special Visit Premium Table" applicable in the circumstances.
Payment rules:
1.Special visit premiums are only eligible for payment when rendered with certain services
listed under "Consultations and Visits" and "Diagnostic and Therapeutic Procedures"
sections of this Schedule.
2.Regardless of the time of day at which the service is rendered, special visit premiums are not
eligible for payment in the following circumstances:
a.for patients seen during rounds at a hospital or long-term care institution (including a
nursing home or home for the aged);
b.in conjunction with admission assessments of patients who have been admitted to
hospital on an elective basis;
c.for non-referred or transferred obstetrical patients except, in the case of transferred
obstetrical patients for a special visit for obstetrical delivery with sacrifice of office hours
for the first patient seen (C989);
d.for services rendered in a place, other than a hospital or long-term care facility, that is
scheduled to be open for the purpose of diagnosing or treating patients;
e.for a visit for which critical care team fees are payable under this Schedule;
f. in conjunction with any sleep study service listed in the sleep studies section of this
Schedule; or
g.for services rendered to patients who present to an office without an appointment while
the physician is there, or for patients seen immediately before, during or immediately after
routine or ordinary office hours even if held at night or on weekends or holidays.
3.Special visit premiums are not eligible for payment with services described by emergency
department "H" prefix fee codes.
[Commentary:
For elective home visits rendered during daytime, evenings, nights or weekends, submit
claim(s) using fee codes found under the column titled "Elective Home Visit" of Special Visit
Premium Table VI listed on page GP75.]
Sacrifice of office hours means an insured service rendered when the demands of the patient and/or
the patient's condition are such that the physician makes a previously unscheduled non-elective visit
to the patient at a time when the physician had an office visit booked with one or more patients but,
because of the previously unscheduled non-elective visit, any such office visit was delayed or
cancelled.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP65 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 80 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
PREMIUMS
[Commentary:
Special visit premiums are in respect of either or both: a "travel premium" and a "patient seen"
premium (i.e. "first person seen premium" or "an additional person seen premium").]
A. Travel Premium
Definition/required elements of service:
A travel premium is only eligible for payment for travel from one location to another location ("the
destination") subject to the payment rules below.
A travel premium is not eligible for payment when a physician is required to travel from one location to
another within the same long-term care facility, hospital complex or within buildings situated on the
same hospital campus.
[Commentary:
1.A first person seen premium may be eligible for payment in this circumstance.
2.Only one travel premium is eligible for payment for each separate trip to a destination
regardless of the number of patients seen in association with each trip.]
B. First person seen premium
A first person seen premium is eligible for payment for the first person seen at the destination under
one of the following circumstances ("the eligible times"):
1. if the insured service is commenced evenings (17:00 hr-24:00 hr) Monday to Friday; daytime or
evenings on Saturdays, Sundays, and Holidays; or nights (24:00 hr-07:00 hr);
2. if rendered requiring sacrifice of office hours; or
3. if rendered during daytime hours (07:00 - 17:00 hrs Monday through Friday) in circumstances in
which a travel premium is eligible for payment.
C. Additional person premium
An additional person premium is only eligible for payment for services rendered at the destination to
additional patients seen in emergency departments, outpatient departments, long-term care
institutions or to hospital inpatients, provided that each additional patient service is commenced
during the eligible times.
[Commentary:
Special visit premiums are not eligible for payment for elective services rendered at a long-term
care institution, including a nursing home or home for the aged, even when the long-term care
institution is the "home" of the patient.
Submit claims for routine elective visits in these locations as subsequent visits. For example, if
the physician is called to a nursing home to see a patient for a non-elective problem at 8AM,
and subsequently sees his/her routine patients on rounds, those additional patients do not
qualify for the additional person premium.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP66 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 81 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
LIMITS FOR SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
Special visit premiums in excess of the maximums listed in the Special Visit Premium Tables are not
eligible for payment.
The maximums apply to the number of patients where special visit premiums may be eligible for
payment on that service date or in the time period specified.
LIMITS FOR GERIATRIC HOME VISIT SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
For the purpose of special visit premiums under the heading "Geriatric Home Visit Special Visit
Premiums", the special visit premiums listed under Table X are only eligible for payment to:
a. a specialist in Geriatrics (07); or
b. a physician with an exemption to access bonus impact in Care of the Elderly from the MOH.
LIMITS FOR EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT PHYSICIAN
For the purpose of special visit premiums under the heading "Emergency Department Physician",
"Emergency Department Physician" means a physician:
a. who on a day when the physician is scheduled to work in a hospital emergency department
specifically for the purpose of rendering services to patients who attend the emergency
department for physician services,
i. is requested by the emergency department to attend at a time when the physician is not
otherwise scheduled to work in the emergency department; and
ii. who is not at the hospital at the time the emergency department request for attendance
is made; or
b. is on-call on a scheduled basis specifically to be available to a hospital emergency
department to render services to patients who attend the emergency department for
physician services and who is not at the hospital at the time the emergency department
request for attendance is made.
[Commentary:
Emergency room physicians may be primarily funded either through an Emergency
Department Alternate Funding Arrangement (ED-AFA) or fee-for-service.]
In addition to the general restrictions regarding special visits as outlined above, there are specific
restrictions which apply to special visit premiums for services rendered in the emergency department
by Emergency Department Physicians (as defined above). These limits are listed in the Special Visit
Premiums table under the heading “Emergency Department by Emergency Department Physician”
(Table V). Special Visit Premiums listed in the Special Visit Premiums table under the heading
"Emergency Department" (Table I) are not eligible for payment to Emergency Department Physicians
(as defined above).
[Commentary:
1.First patient seen and additional person seen premiums for Emergency Department
Physicians are eligible for payment only when the physician is required to travel, as defined
under “Travel Premium” page GP66, to make a special visit to the hospital emergency
department.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP67 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 82 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
2.If the Emergency Department Physician is at the hospital at the time the emergency
department request for attendance is made, the appropriate H prefix code may be eligible for
payment.
3.If the Emergency Department Physician is called to a hospital ward on a non-elective basis,
the General Listings ("A" prefix) apply and "C" prefix first person seen/additional person seen
special visit premium may be eligible for payment.]
Note:
When special visits are rendered by physicians when they are not on duty to the emergency
department, the limits for special visit premiums under the heading "Emergency Department"
(Table I) apply (GP70). For patients assessed during this visit to the emergency department
beyond the defined limits, submit claims for all subsequent patients using the "H" prefix listings.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP68 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 83 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
Medical record requirements:
Special Visit Premiums are only eligible for payment if the following requirements are met:
1. For fee codes listed in Tables I, II, III, IV, VI, VII, VIII, IX and X the time at which the special visit
takes place must be documented on the medical record.
2. For fee codes listed in Table V;
a. the time of the request to attend in the emergency department must be documented on the
medical record; and
b. The specific situation requiring the physician's attendance must be documented on the
medical record.
[Commentary:
When a special visit service occurs in a hospital, emergency department or long-term care
institution where common medical records are maintained, the time when the visit takes place
may be documented anywhere in the common medical record.]
Claims submission instructions:
Submit claims using the appropriate A-prefix assessment fee from the “General Listings” for an
assessment rendered in conjunction with a special visit premium.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP69 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 84 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE I
Emergency Department
Not eligible for payment to Emergency Department Physicians (see definition GP67)
Weekdays Evenings Sat., Sun.
Weekdays Daytime (07:00 - (17:00- 24:00) and
Nights (00:00-
Premium Daytime 17:00) with Monday Holidays
07:00)
(07:00- 17:00) Sacrifice of through (07:00-
Office Hours Friday 24:00)
Travel $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40
Premium K960 K961 K962 K963 K964
(max. 2 per time (max. 2 per time (max. 2 per (max. 6 per (no max. per
period) period) time period) time period) time period)
First $20.00 $40.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
Person K990 K992 K994 K998 K996
Seen (max. 10 (total (max. 10 (total of (max. 10 (total (max. 20 (no max. per
of first and first and of first and (total of first time period)
additional additional person additional and
person seen) seen) per time person seen) additional
per time period) period) per time person
period) seen) per
time period)
Additional $20.00 $40.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
Person(s) K991 K993 K995 K999 K997
seen (max. 10 (total (max. 10 (total of (max. 10 (total (max. 20 (no max. per
of first and first and of first and (total of first time period)
additional additional person additional and
person seen) seen) per time person seen) additional
per time period) period) per time person
period) seen) per
time period)
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP70 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 85 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE II
Hospital Out-Patient Department
Weekdays Evenings
Sat., Sun.
Weekdays Daytime (17:00-
and
Daytime (07:00- 24:00) Nights
Premium Holidays
(07:00- 17:00) with Monday (00:00- 07:00)
(07:00-
17:00) Sacrifice of through
24:00)
Office Hours Friday
Travel Premium $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40
U960 U961 U962 U963 U964
(max. 2 per (max. 2 per (max. 2 per (max. 6 per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period) time period) time period)
First person $20.00 $40.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
seen U990 U992 U994 U998 U996
(max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 20 (no max. per
(total of first (total of first (total of first (total of first time period)
and and and and
additional additional additional additional
person seen) person seen) person seen) person seen)
per time per time per time per time
period) period) period) period)
Additional $20.00 $40.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
person(s) seen U991 U993 U995 U999 U997
(max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 20 (no max. per
(total of first (total of first (total of first (total of first time period)
and and and and
additional additional additional additional
person seen) person seen) person seen) person seen)
per time per time per time per time
period) period) period) period)
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP71 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 86 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE III
Hospital In-Patient
Weekdays Evenings
Sat., Sun.
Weekdays Daytime (17:00-
and Nights
Daytime (07:00- 24:00)
Premium Holidays (00:00-
(07:00- 17:00) with Monday
(07:00- 07:00)
17:00) Sacrifice of through
24:00)
Office Hours Friday
Travel $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40
Premium C960 C961 C962 C963 C964
(max. 2 per (max. 2 per (max. 2 per (max. 6 per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period) time period) time period)
First person $20.00 $40.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
seen C990 C992 C994 C986 C996
(max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 20 (no max. per
(total of first (total of first (total of first (total of first time period)
and and and and
additional additional additional additional
person seen) person seen) person seen) person seen)
per time per time per time per time
period) period) period) period)
Additional $20.00 $40.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
person(s) seen C991 C993 C995 C987 C997
(max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 20 (no max. per
(total of first (total of first (total of first (total of first time period)
and and and and
additional additional additional additional
person seen) person seen) person seen) person seen)
per time per time per time per time
period) period) period) period)
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP72 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 87 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE IV
Long-Term Care Institution
Weekdays Evenings
Sat., Sun.
Weekdays Daytime (17:00-
and Nights
Daytime (07:00- 24:00)
Premium Holidays (00:00-
(07:00- 17:00) with Monday
(07:00- 07:00)
17:00) Sacrifice of through
24:00)
Office Hours Friday
Travel $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40
Premium W960 W961 W962 W963 W964
(max. 2 per (max. 2 per (max. 2 per (max. 6 per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period) time period) time period)
First person $20.00 $40.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
seen W990 W992 W994 W998 W996
(max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 20 (no max. per
(total of first (total of first (total of first (total of first time period)
and and and and
additional additional additional additional
person person seen) person seen) person seen)
seen) per per time per time per time
time period) period) period) period)
Additional $20.00 $40.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
person(s) seen W991 W993 W995 W999 W997
(max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 20 (no max. per
(total of first (total of first (total of first (total of first time period)
and and and and
additional additional additional additional
person person seen) person seen) person seen)
seen) per per time per time per time
time period) period) period) period)
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP73 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 88 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE V
Emergency Department by Emergency Department Physician
(as defined on GP67)
Evenings
Sat., Sun.
Weekdays (17:00-
and Nights
Daytime 24:00)
Premium Holidays (00:00-
(07:00- Monday
(07:00- 07:00)
17:00) through
24:00)
Friday
Travel Premium $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40
H960 H962 H963 H964
(max. 2 per (max. 2 per (max. 4 per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period) time period)
First person seen $20.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
H980 H984 H988 H986
(max. 5 (max. 5 (total (max. 10 (no max. per
(total of first of first and (total of first time period)
and additional and
additional person seen) additional
person per time person
seen) per period) seen) per
time period) time period)
Additional person(s) $20.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
seen H981 H985 H989 H987
(max. 5 (max. 5 (total (max. 10 (no max. per
(total of first of first and (total of first time period)
and additional and
additional person seen) additional
person per time person
seen) per period) seen) per
time period) time period)
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP74 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 89 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE VI
Special Visits to Patient's Home (other than Long-Term Care Institution)
Weekdays Evenings
Sat., Sun.
Weekdays Daytime (17:00-
and Nights
Daytime (07:00- 24:00)
Holidays (00:00-
(07:00- 17:00) with Monday Elective
Premium (07:00- 07:00)
17:00) Sacrifice of through home visit
24:00) Non-
Non- Office Friday
Non- elective
elective Hours Non- Non-
elective
elective elective
Travel $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40
Premium B960 B961 B962 B963 B964 B960
(max. 2 (max. 2 per (max. 2 per (max. 6 (no max. (max. 2 per
per time time period) time period) per time per time time period)
period) period) period)
First $27.50 $44.00 $66.00 $82.50 $110.00 $27.50
person B990 B992 B994 B993 B996 B990
seen (max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 10 (max. 20 (no max. (max. 10
(total of (total of first (total of first (total of per time (total of first
first and and and first and period) and
additional additional additional additional additional
person person person person person
seen) per seen) per seen) per seen) per seen) per
time time period) time period) time time period)
period) period)
Note:
1.The maximum number of services per physician per day for B960 is 2, for any combination of
non-elective and elective visits.
2.The maximum number of services per physician per day for B990 is 10, for any combination
of non-elective and elective visits.
3.Special visit to patient’s home premiums are only eligible for payment for first patient seen,
regardless of number of patients seen during one visit to a home or to one or more living
units in a multiple resident dwelling. A multiple resident dwelling is a single location that
shares a common external building entrance or lobby e.g. apartment block, rest or retirement
home, commercial hotel, motel or boarding house, university or boarding school residence,
hostel, correctional facility or group home.
[Commentary:
1.Special visit premiums listed in Table VI above are not eligible for payment with A007 or
A001 when rendered in a patient’s home. See page A2.
2.For A007 or A001 rendered in a patient’s home, travelling to and from the home is included
as a common element of the insured service. See page GP13 of this Schedule.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP75 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 90 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE VII
Palliative Care Home Visit
Weekdays
Evenings
Daytime Sat., Sun.
Weekdays (17:00-
(07:00- and Nights
Daytime 24:00)
Premium 17:00) with Holidays (00:00-
(07:00- Monday
Sacrifice of (07:00- 07:00)
17:00) through
Office 24:00)
Friday
Hours
Travel $36.40 B966 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40
Premium (no max. per B966 (no B966 B966 B966
time period) max. per (no max. (no max. (no max.
time period) per time per time per time
period) period) period)
First person $82.50 B998 $82.50 $82.50 $82.50 $110.00
seen (no max. per B998 (no B998 B998 B997
time period) max. per (no max. (no max. (no max.
time period) per time per time per time
period) period) period)
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE VIII
Physician Office
Evenings
Sat., Sun.
Weekdays (17:00-
and
Daytime 24:00) Nights
Premium Holidays
(07:00- Monday (00:00- 07:00)
(07:00-
17:00) through
24:00)
Friday
Travel Premium $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40
A960 A962 A963 A964
(max. 1 per (max. 1 per (max. 1 per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period) time period)
First person $20.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
seen A990 A994 A998 A996
(max. 1 per (max. 1 per (max. 1 per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period) time period)
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP76 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 91 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE IX
Other (non-professional setting not listed)
Weekdays
Evenings
Daytime Sat., Sun.
Weekdays (17:00-
(07:00- and Nights
Daytime 24:00)
Premium 17:00) with Holidays (00:00-
(07:00- Monday
Sacrifice of (07:00- 07:00)
17:00) through
Office 24:00)
Friday
Hours
Travel $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40
Premium Q960 Q961 Q962 Q963 Q964
(max. 1 per (max. 1 per (max. 1 per (max. 1 per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period) time period) time period)
First person $20.00 $40.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
seen Q990 Q992 Q994 Q998 Q996
(max. 1 per (max. 1 per (max. 1 per (max. 1 per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period) time period) time period)
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE X
Geriatric Home Visit
Weekdays Evenings
Sat., Sun.
Weekdays Daytime (17:00-
and Nights
Daytime (07:00- 24:00)
Premium Holidays (00:00-
(07:00- 17:00) with Monday
(07:00- 07:00)
17:00) Sacrifice of through
24:00)
Office Hours Friday
Travel Premium $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40 $36.40
B986 B986 B986 B986 B986
(no max. per (no max. per (no max. per (no max. per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period) time period) time period)
First person $82.50 $82.50 $82.50 $82.50 $110.00
seen B988 B988 B988 B988 B987
(no max. per (no max. per (no max. per (no max. per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period) time period) time period)
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP77 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 92 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE - OBSTETRICAL DELIVERY WITH SACRIFICE OF OFFICE
HOURS
Obstetrical Delivery with Sacrifice of Office Hours
Evenings Sat., Sun.
Weekdays
Sacrifice (17:00- 24:00) and Nights
Daytime
of Office Monday Holidays (00:00-
(07:00-
Hours through (07:00- 07:00)
17:00)
Friday 24:00)
$0.00 $76.40 $0.00 $0.00 $0.00
C989
(max. 1
per time
period)
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP78 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 93 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SUPERVISION OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL TRAINEES
[Commentary:
1.A physician who supervises a medical trainee who renders an insured service is eligible to
be paid for the insured service as if the supervising physician performed the service
personally, subject to any terms, conditions and limitations found in this section.
2.The sole purpose of the terms and conditions described in this section is to define when a
service is payable by OHIP. These terms and conditions do not alter the College of
Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario Professional Responsibilities in Postgraduate Medical
Education requirements or any requirements of the institutions responsible for postgraduate
medical education.]
Note:
Unless otherwise specified in this section, all other payment requirements in the Schedule
related to any service that is performed by a Medical Trainee are applicable.
DEFINITIONS:
For the purposes of this section of the Schedule only, the following Definitions apply:
Supervision: Supervision is performed by the Supervising Physician and includes the
responsibility to guide, observe and assess the educational activities of
the Medical Trainee and assures the quality of an insured service while
being rendered by the Medical Trainee.
Supervision is only performed:
a. in person, by telephone, or videoconference, the method being consistent with the acuity of
the service being rendered by the Medical Trainee as well as the Medical Trainee’s level of
competence;
b. when the service is provided within a setting approved by the educational institution where
the Medical Trainee is registered; and
c. when the service is within the scope and oversight of the postgraduate medical training
program in which the Medical Trainee is registered.
[Commentary:
The Supervising Physician and the Medical Trainee must be physically present in Ontario.]
Supervising The Supervising Physician is a physician who performs Supervision of a
Physician Medical Trainee who renders an insured service to an insured person.
The Supervising Physician must hold an academic appointment with the
educational institution where the Medical Trainee is registered. The
Supervising Physician of a Medical Trainee involved in the care of a
patient may or may not be the most responsible physician for that
patient.
Medical Trainee A Medical Trainee is a physician who is registered in a postgraduate
training program as a Resident or Clinical Fellow at the time he/she
performs an insured service.
Resident A Resident is registered in an accredited postgraduate training program
that leads to certification for practice in Canada as a specialist or
subspecialist by the Royal College of Physicians and Surgeons of
Canada or to certification by the College of Family Physicians of Canada
for practice in Canada as a family physician.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP79 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 94 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SUPERVISION OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL TRAINEES
Clinical Fellow A Clinical Fellow is registered with a postgraduate training program that
is approved by a university postgraduate medical education office in
Ontario. The Clinical Fellow must have a Certificate of Registration with
the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario.
[Commentary:
An undergraduate is not a physician and does not meet the definition of a Medical Trainee]
Procedure A Procedure is an insured service that has anaesthesia base units listed
in the column headed with “Anae” and includes anaesthesia services
provided by Anaesthesiologists.
Non-Procedure A Non-Procedure Service is an insured service, other than Procedures
and Time-Based Services.
Time-Based A Time-Based Service is an insured service described as
Services Psychotherapy, Psychiatric and Counselling, Interviews, Hypnotherapy,
Psychiatric Care and Primary Mental Health Care.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP80 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 95 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SUPERVISION OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL TRAINEES
Payment Rules
A. GENERAL
1. A service rendered by a Medical Trainee is only eligible for payment to the Supervising
Physician where Supervision is provided as defined above and subject to the specific
requirements below.
2. Where a Resident with an OHIP billing number is providing insured services independently and
outside their training program, the insured service is not eligible for payment to a Supervising
Physician as there is no Supervision provided.
[Commentary:
In the scenario described above the Resident is not performing the service as a Medical
Trainee. In this scenario, the Resident would bill OHIP for the service provided.]
3. Where a Clinical Fellow with an OHIP billing number is providing insured services
independently and outside their training program, the insured service is not eligible for payment
to a Supervising Physician as there is no Supervision provided.
[Commentary:
In the scenario described above the Clinical Fellow is not performing the services as a Medical
Trainee. In this scenario, the Clinical Fellow would bill OHIP for the services provided. For
example, an orthopedic surgeon may be enrolled in a sarcoma surgery clinical fellowship but
has privileges as a general orthopedic surgeon and may perform, and be eligible for payment,
for rendering a service such as an open reduction of a fracture that is not being supervised by
a Supervising Physician.]
4. Special Visit premiums are not eligible for payment to the Supervising Physician unless the
Supervising Physician personally satisfies the payment requirements for a special visit
premium.
5. The following services are not eligible for payment to the Supervising Physician when rendered
by a Medical Trainee:
a. Case Conferences;
b. Multidisciplinary Cancer Conferences;
c. Provider-to-provider services, including:
i. Telephone Consultations;
ii. E-Consultations; and
iii. E-Assessments.
d. Virtual Care Services when provided to hospital inpatients or patients in an emergency
department.
B. PROCEDURE SERVICES
1. A Procedure rendered by a Resident is only eligible for payment to the Supervising Physician
when the Supervising Physician:
a. is aware the Resident will render the service; and
b. is physically present in the clinical facility at the time the service is rendered; and
c. is immediately available to personally attend the patient when requested by the Resident or
other health care professional.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP81 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 96 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SUPERVISION OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL TRAINEES
2. A Procedure rendered by a Clinical Fellow is only eligible for payment to the Supervising
Physician when the Supervising Physician:
a. is aware the Clinical Fellow will render the service; and
b. is available to personally attend the patient when requested by the Clinical Fellow or other
health care professional in a timely manner consistent with the acuity of the clinical
scenario.
Note:
Payment rule 2(b) above is not applicable in circumstances where a Supervising Physician
supervises Procedures rendered by a Clinical Fellow for the purpose of procurement of organs
or tissues to be used in transplantation.
3. Where a Procedure is rendered by a Clinical Fellow with an OHIP billing number under the
supervision of a Supervising Physician, the Procedure is eligible for payment to the Clinical
Fellow as a surgical assistant if the Procedure has basic units listed in the column headed with
“Asst”.
[Commentary:
1.The Supervising Physician should submit a claim as the operating surgeon in this situation
(“A” suffix).
2.The Clinical Fellow should submit a claim as the assistant (“B” suffix).]
C. TIME-BASED SERVICES
1. A Time-Based Service rendered by a Medical Trainee is only eligible for payment to the
Supervising Physician when the Supervising Physician is aware the Medical Trainee will render
the service.
2. The number of time units payable is the time spent by the Medical Trainee providing the service
to the patient subject to limits set out below:
Note:
1.Any time taken in discussion with the Medical Trainee about the case is not eligible for
payment.
2.The maximum number of time units payable for a Time-Based service rendered by the
Medical Trainee(s) to an individual patient is two units.
3.The maximum number of time units payable for a Time-Based service rendered by the
Medical Trainee(s) to a group of two or more patients is four units.
[Commentary:
1.Where there is more than one Medical Trainee participating in the rendering of a time-based
service concurrently, only the time units rendered by one Medical Trainee are eligible for
payment to the same Supervising Physician.]
D. NUMBER OF MEDICAL TRAINEES
The following table describes the maximum number of services that are payable for services rendered
concurrently by Medical Trainee(s) and the Supervising Physician.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP82 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 97 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SUPERVISION OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL TRAINEES
Maximum number of insured
Location Where services eligible for payment
Type of Insured Service Insured Services when rendered concurrently
are Rendered by the Medical Trainee(s) and
the Supervising Physician
Procedures Only Any 2
Procedures with any Any 2
combination of Non-
Procedures or Time-
Based Services
Any Combination of Non- Any 3
Procedures or Time-
Based Services
Any Combination of Non- Specialized Clinic 4
Procedures or Time- in a Quaternary
Based Services Hospital
Any Combination of Non- Emergency No Limit
Procedures or Time- Department
Based Services
Any Combination of Non- Hospital Inpatient No Limit
Procedures or Time-
Based Services
Note:
1.Maximum number of services rendered concurrently include all services rendered by both
the Medical Trainee(s) and the Supervising Physician.
2.With respect to the maximum number of services eligible for payment in Specialized Clinics
located at a Quaternary hospital, the following is applicable:
a.The maximums are applicable only for clinics that have been approved by the MOH.
b.In the absence of MOH approval, the other maximums pertaining to the type and location
of insured services rendered by the Supervising Physician and Medical Trainee(s) are
applicable.
3.The above maximums refer to Time-Based Services rendered to individual patients. In
circumstances where Time-Based Services are rendered to groups of two or more patients,
the group session is considered to be a service provided to one patient.
[Commentary:
1.If the Supervising Physician is personally performing a Procedure at the same time and is
Supervising one Medical Trainee who is performing a Procedure, this situation describes two
insured services that are payable.
2.If the Supervising Physician is personally performing a Procedure and at the same time is
Supervising two Medical Trainees who are both performing Procedures, this situation
describes three services but only two of the three insured services are payable.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP83 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 98 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SUPERVISION OF POSTGRADUATE MEDICAL TRAINEES
3.If the Supervising Physician is personally rendering a service other than a Procedure (i.e. a
Non-Procedure or a Time-Based Service) and is supervising two Medical Trainees who are
performing Procedures concurrently, this situation describes three services but only two
insured services that are payable.
4.If the Supervising Physician is personally rendering a Non-Procedure and is Supervising two
Medical Trainees who are both performing Non-Procedures or Time-Based services at the
same time, this situation describes three insured services that are payable.]
E. Forms
1. An insured service listed in the Schedule that includes the completion of a form is not eligible for
payment to a Supervising Physician if rendered by a Medical Trainee unless the form has been
reviewed and signed by the Supervising Physician.
F. Medical Record Requirements
1. A service is only eligible for payment to the Supervising Physician when the medical record of
the patient(s) identifies the following information at the time of the provision of the service:
a. The Supervising Physician;
b. The Medical Trainee and level of training;
c. The description of the insured service performed by the Medical Trainee;
d. Patient consent to the Supervision of services of a Medical Trainee; and
e. Where the service rendered is a Time-Based service, the Supervising Physician has at a
minimum, reviewed the nature and outcome of the service and the patient record(s), with the
Medical Trainee.
2. In addition to the requirements in 1 above, the Supervising Physician must have:
a. signed off on the service rendered by the Medical Trainee in the patient’s medical record; or
b. where the Supervising Physician was not immediately available to sign off on the service
rendered by the Medical Trainee, the Medical Trainee has written the date and time a
discussion occurred with the Supervising Physician regarding the provision of the service in
the patient’s medical record.
[Commentary:
Each entry into the patient’s medical record does not need to contain all of the above medical
record keeping requirements. However, it must be evident upon review of the entire medical
record that all requirements were met at the time of the provision of the Supervised service.
Supervision of the Medical Trainee by the Supervising Physician must be evident in the
medical record. This may include a physical visit to the patient and/or a chart review and
detailed discussion between the Supervising Physician, the Medical Trainee, and other
member(s) of the health team.
The service date to be used for claims is the date the Medical Trainee rendered the insured
service to the patient.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP84 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 99 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SURGICAL ASSISTANTS’ SERVICES
SPECIFIC ELEMENTS
In addition to the common elements, assistance at surgery includes the following specific elements.
A. Preparing or supervising the preparation of the patient for the procedure.
B. Performing the procedure by any method, or assisting another physician in the performance of the
procedure(s), assisting with the carrying out of all recovery room procedures and the transfer of the
patient to the recovery room, and any ongoing monitoring and detention rendered during the
immediate post-operative and recovery period, when indicated.
C. Making arrangements for any related assessments, procedures, or therapy, (including obtaining
any specimens from the patient) and/or interpreting results.
D. When medically indicated, monitoring the condition of the patient for post-procedure follow-up until
the first post-operative visit.
E. Discussion with, and providing any advice and information, including prescribing therapy to the
patient or the patient’s representative, whether by telephone or otherwise, on matters related to the
service.
F. Providing premises, equipment, supplies, and personnel for services identified with prefix # for any
aspect(s) of A, C, D, and E that is (are) performed in a place other than the place in which the
surgical procedure is performed.
While no occasion may arise for performing elements A, C, D or E, when performed in connection with
the specific elements of a service, these are included in the service.
CALCULATION OF FEE PAYABLE: BASIC UNITS AND TIME UNITS
Except where “nil” is listed opposite the service in the column headed with “Asst”, the amount payable
for the surgical assistant service is calculated by adding together the number of basic and time units
and multiplying that total by the unit fee.
Assistant Unit Fee ................................................................ $12.51
Basic Units: The number of basic units is the number of units listed opposite the service in the
column headed with “Asst”, except
a. where multiple or bilateral surgical procedures are performed during the same anaesthetic,
the number of basic units is that listed in the column headed with “Asst” opposite the service
that describes the major procedure; or
b. where no basic unit is listed opposite the service in the column headed with “Asst” and
where “nil” is not listed opposite the service in the column headed with “Asst”, the number of
basic units is that listed opposite the service under the column headed with “Anae”. This
type of service is only eligible for payment upon authorization by a medical consultant
following submission of a letter from the surgeon outlining the reason the assistant was
required. Submit claims for this type of service using fee code M400B.
Where “nil” is listed opposite the service in the column headed with “Asst”, the assistant’s service is
not eligible for payment.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP85 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 100 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SURGICAL ASSISTANTS’ SERVICES
Time Units: For the purpose of calculating time units, time is determined per operation as the total of
the following, excluding any time spent waiting between surgical procedures:
a. time spent by the physician in direct contact with the patient in the operating room prior to
scrub time to assist with patient preparation; and
b. time spent by the physician assisting at the patient's surgery starting with scrub time and
ending when the physician is no longer required to be in attendance with that patient.
Time units are calculated for each 15 minutes or part thereof. The unit value of each 15 minute period
or part thereof is:
During the first hour or less..................................................... 1 unit
After the first hour ................................................................... 2 units
After 2.5 hours ........................................................................ 3 units
Claims submission instruction:
Submit claims for assisting at surgery using the suffix “B”, with the procedural code.
[Commentary:
See Appendix H for a table stating the duration of surgical assisting and corresponding time
units.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP86 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 101 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
SURGICAL ASSISTANTS’ SERVICES
AFTER HOURS PREMIUMS
These premiums are payable when a case commences:
E400B Evenings (17:00h – 24:00h) Monday to Friday or daytime and
evenings on Saturdays, Sundays or Holidays - increase the
total assistant’s fee by ........................................................ 50%
E401B Nights (00:00h – 07:00h) - increase the total assistant's fee by 75%
REPLACEMENT SURGICAL ASSISTANT
When one surgical assistant (“the first assistant”) starts a procedure and is replaced by another
surgical assistant (“the replacement assistant”) during a surgical procedure:
a. The amount payable to the first assistant is calculated by adding the listed procedural basic
units plus time units for the time the first assistant is in attendance.
b. The service provided by the replacement assistant constitutes E005B based on the number
of time units for the time the replacement assistant is in attendance.
Payment rules:
1.Base units are not eligible for payment to the replacement assistant.
2.Time units for the replacement assistant are calculated based on the total time the
replacement assistant participates in the case. Time unit values are calculated in the same
manner as would have applied to the original assistant had he/she not been replaced.
[Commentary:
As an example, if the original assistant is eligible for double time units when the replacement
assistant takes over, the replacement assistant is also eligible for double time units.]
3.E400B or E401B is eligible for payment with E005B only if the beginning of the case
commences after hours.
Medical record requirements:
E005B is only eligible for payment when the start and stop times are documented in the
patient’s permanent medical record.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP87 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 102 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
SURGICAL ASSISTANTS’ SERVICES
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
All special visit premiums are subject to the maximums, limitations and conditions set out in the
"Special Visit Premium Table" applicable in the circumstances.
Sacrifice of Office Hours
[Commentary:
For the definition of Sacrifice of Office Hours, see GP65.]
C988B Special visit premium to assist at non-elective surgery with
sacrifice of office hours - first patient seen.......................... 76.40
Payment rules:
C988B is not eligible for payment in respect of any special visits to assist at surgery in a calendar
month if the amount payable for all surgical assistant's fees (including special visit premiums
associated with performing surgical assistant services) rendered by the physician in that month is
greater than 20% of the total amount payable for all insured services rendered by the physician in that
month.
Evenings, Weekend/Holiday and Nights
C998B Evenings (17:00h - 24:00h) Monday to Friday, first patient
seen..................................................................................... 67.05
C983B Saturdays, Sundays or Holidays, daytime and evenings
(07:00h -24:00h), first patient seen ..................................... 85.60
C999B Nights (00:00h - 07:00h), first patient seen ............................. 117.65
Payment rules:
1. C988B, C998B, C983B and C999B are only eligible for payment for the first patient seen on
each special visit.
2. C988B, C998B, C983B, C999B are only eligible for payment when the physician is required to
travel from one location to another location, as defined under “Travel Premium”, page
GP66.
[Commentary:
1.The specific requirements for special visits are found on pages GP65 to GP77.
2.These premiums are eligible for payment in addition to the E400 and E401 premiums.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP88 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 103 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SURGICAL ASSISTANTS’ SERVICES
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE - SURGICAL ASSISTANT SERVICES
Surgical Assistant Services
Evenings
Sat., Sun.
Weekdays (17:00-
Sacrifice of and Nights
Daytime 24:00)
Office Holidays (00:00-
(07:00- Monday
Hours (07:00- 07:00)
17:00) through
24:00)
Friday
$0.00 $76.40 $67.05 $85.60 $117.65
C988B C998B C983B C999B
(max. 1 per (max. 2 per (max. 6 per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period) time period)
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP89 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 104 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SURGICAL ASSISTANTS’ SERVICES
CANCELLED SURGERY – ASSISTANT SERVICES
Payment rules:
1. If the procedure is cancelled prior to induction of anaesthesia, the service constitutes a
subsequent hospital visit.
2. When an anaesthetic has begun but the operation is cancelled due to a complication prior to
commencement of surgery and the assistant has scrubbed but is not required to do anything
further, the service is payable as E006B with the actual number of time units added to 6 basic
units for this service.
[Commentary:
If the operation is cancelled after surgery has commenced, the amount payable is calculated
by adding the listed procedural basic units plus time units and multiplying the total by the unit
fee listed at the start of this section.]
SECOND ASSISTANT
Payment rules:
When more than one assistant was required for a surgical procedure, unless the service is listed
below, the second assistant’s service is only eligible for payment following authorization by a medical
consultant and requires submission of a letter from the surgeon outlining the reason the second
assistant was required. The amount payable for the second assistant is calculated in the same
manner as the amount payable for the first assistant.
Services where a second assistant's services are payable and authorization is not required:
E645, M111, M112, M117, M134, M142, P042, P051, P052, P056, P059, R008, R009, R013, R014,
R015, R016, R055, R056, R064, R065, R067, R069, R134, R135, R136, R140, R182, R240, R241,
R244, R326, R327, R334, R393, R438, R440, R441, R483, R487, R545, R553, R568, R593, R594,
R617, R645, R701, R702, R704, R712, R713, R714, R715, R718, R726, R727, R728, R729, R733,
R734, R735, R737, R738, R742, R743, R746, R747, R749, R764, R770, R771, R772, R785, R786,
R799, R800, R801, R802, R803, R804, R811, R815, R817, R818, R830, R832, R858, R863, R870,
R872, R874, R876, R877, R927, R929, R920, R930, S005, S007, S079, S090, S091, S092, S096,
S098, S099, S120, S125, S189, S213, S214, S267, S270, S271, S274, S275, S294, S295, S298,
S300, S321, S416, S429, S440, S441, S453, S454, S462, S484, S750, S758, S759, S816
[Commentary:
E003B is not eligible for payment for second assistant services.]
SURGICAL ASSISTANT STANDBY
Definition/Required elements of service:
E101B is a time-based service limited to one surgical case per physician per day payable for standby
as a surgical assistant following a minimum of 30 minutes of unforeseen delay beyond the scheduled
start time for surgery. The physician must be physically present in the operating room suite for the
period between the scheduled and actual surgical start time.
Payment rules:
1. For calculation of time units, the start time for this service commences 30 minutes after the
scheduled surgical start time and ends when the surgery actually commences as recorded in
the hospital’s operating suite records. There are no basic units.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP90 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 105 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
SURGICAL ASSISTANTS’ SERVICES
2. E101B is not eligible for payment if during the standby time for which E101B would otherwise
be eligible for payment, other insured services are rendered for which payment is made by
OHIP.
[Commentary:
E101B is payable with after hours premiums.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP91 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 106 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ANAESTHESIOLOGISTS’ SERVICES
SPECIFIC ELEMENTS
In addition to the common elements, the general anaesthesia service includes the following specific
elements.
A. Supervising the preparation of the patient for anaesthesia.
B. Performing the anaesthetic procedure, and procedures associated with the anaesthetic procedure
which are not separately payable including providing all supportive measures to the patient during
and immediately after the period of anaesthesia; transfer of or assisting with the transfer of the
patient to the recovery room; all indicated recovery room procedures, and ongoing monitoring and
detention during the immediate post-operative and recovery period.
C. Making arrangements for any assessments, procedures, or therapy, including obtaining any
specimens (except for arterial puncture Z459), and/or interpreting the results, on matters related to
the service.
D. Making, or supervising the making of, arrangements for follow-up care and when medically
indicated, post-procedure monitoring of the patient’s condition until the next insured service is
provided.
E. Discussion with, and providing any advice and information, including prescribing therapy to the
patient or the patient’s representative, whether by telephone or otherwise, on matters related to the
service.
F. Providing premises, equipment, supplies, and personnel for any aspect(s) of specific elements A,
C, D, and E that is (are) performed in a place other than the place in which the general anaesthetic
service is performed.
While no occasion may arise for performing elements C, D or E, when performed in connection with
the other specific elements, they are included in the general anaesthetic service.
The general anaesthesia service includes:
a. a pre-anaesthetic evaluation, with specific elements as for assessments (see GP15);
b. the anaesthetic procedure; and
c. post-anaesthetic follow-up.
Note:
1.With the exception of the listings in the “Consultations and Visits” section, all references to an
anaesthesiologist in this Schedule are references to any physician providing anaesthetic
services.
2.As defined in the General Preamble (see GP2), general anaesthesia, for the purposes of this
Schedule, includes all forms of anaesthesia except local infiltration, unless otherwise
specifically listed.
CALCULATION OF FEE PAYABLE – BASIC AND TIME UNITS
The amount payable for the anaesthesia service is calculated by adding the number of basic and time
units and multiplying the total by the anaesthesiologist unit fee.
Anaesthesiologist Unit fee .................................................. $15.49
Basic Units: The number of basic units is the number of basic units listed opposite the service in the
column headed with “Anae” except,
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP92 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 107 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ANAESTHESIOLOGISTS’ SERVICES
a. where multiple or bilateral surgical procedures are performed during the same anaesthetic,
the number of basic units listed in the column headed with “Anae” opposite the service that
describes the major procedure; or
b. where the basic units are listed as IC, or where no basic units are listed, the amount payable
is calculated by adding the appropriate time units to the basic units listed for a comparable
procedure (taking into account the region, modifying conditions, or techniques).
Time Units: Time units are calculated on the basis of time spent by the anaesthesiologist and
commence when the anaesthesiologist is first in attendance with the patient in the OR for the purpose
of initiating anaesthesia and end when the anaesthesiologist is no longer in attendance (when the
patient may safely be placed under customary post-operative supervision). Time units are calculated
for each 15 minutes or part thereof. The unit value of each 15 minute period or part thereof is:
During the first hour ................................................................ 1 unit
After the first hour up to and including the first 1.5 hours ....... 2 units
After 1.5 hours ........................................................................ 3 units
Claims submission instruction:
Submit claims for anaesthesia services rendered with a surgical procedure using the suffix “C”, with
the procedural code.
[Commentary:
see Appendix H for a table stating the duration of the anaesthesia service and corresponding
time units.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP93 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 108 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
ANAESTHESIOLOGISTS’ SERVICES
AFTER HOURS PREMIUMS
These premiums are payable when a case commences:
E400C Evenings (17:00h – 24:00h) Monday to Friday or daytime and
evenings on Saturdays, Sundays or Holidays - increase the
total anaesthetic fee by ...................................................... 50%
E401C Nights (00:00h – 07:00h) - increase the total anaesthetic fee
by ........................................................................................ 75%
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
All special visit premiums are subject to the maximums, limitations and conditions set out in the
"Special Visit Premium Table" applicable in the circumstances.
Anaesthesia special visit premiums are only eligible for payment when an anaesthesiologist is
required to travel, as defined under “Travel Premium” page GP66, to make a special visit to the
hospital to administer an anaesthetic for a case that commences:
Evenings, Weekend/Holiday, Nights and Sacrifice of Office Hours
C998C Evenings (17:00h - 24:00h) Monday to Friday; or for non-
elective surgery with sacrifice of office hours -
Weekdays ........................................................................... 60.00
C985C Saturdays, Sundays or Holidays daytime and evenings
(07:00h - 24:00h) ................................................................ 75.00
C999C Nights (00:00h - 07:00h).......................................................... 100.00
Payment rules:
C998C, C985C and C999C are eligible for payment only for the first patient seen on each special visit.
[Commentary:
1.The specific requirements for special visits are found in pages GP65 to GP77.
2.These premiums are payable in addition to the E400 and E401 premiums.]
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE - ANAESTHESIA SERVICES
Anaesthesia Services
Weekdays Evenings
Sat., Sun.
Weekdays Daytime (17:00-
and
Daytime (07:00- 24:00) Nights (00:00-
Holidays
(07:00- 17:00) with Monday 07:00)
(07:00-
17:00) Sacrifice of through
24:00)
Office Hours Friday
$0.00 $60.00 $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
C998C C998C C985C C999C
(max. 2 per (max. 2 per (max. 6 per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period) time period)
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP94 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 109 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ANAESTHESIOLOGISTS’ SERVICES
CANCELLED SURGERY - ANAESTHESIA SERVICES
Payment rules:
1. If an anaesthesiologist examines a patient prior to surgery and the surgery is cancelled prior to
the induction of anaesthesia, the service rendered constitutes a hospital subsequent visit.
2. When an anaesthetic has begun but the operation is cancelled prior to commencement of
surgery, the service constitutes E006C with the actual number of time units added to 6 basic
units for this service.
[Commentary:
If the operation is cancelled after surgery has commenced, the amount payable is calculated by
adding the listed procedural basic units plus time units and multiplying the total by the unit fee.]
SECOND ANAESTHESIOLOGIST
Unless otherwise specified in the Schedule, when the anaesthetic services of more than one
anaesthesiologist are necessary in the interest of the patient, the service provided by the second
anaesthesiologist constitutes E001C with the actual number of time units (based on the actual time
assisting the first anaesthesiologist) added to 6 basic units.
REPLACEMENT ANAESTHESIOLOGIST
When one anaesthesiologist starts a procedure and is replaced by another anaesthesiologist (“the
replacement anaesthesiologist”) during a surgical procedure or delivery:
a. the amount payable to the first anaesthesiologist is calculated by adding the listed
procedural basic units plus time units for the time the first anaesthesiologist is in attendance;
b. except in the case of continuous conduction anaesthesia, the service provided by the
replacement anaesthesiologist constitutes E005C based on the actual number of time units
and 6 basic units.
Note:
E005C qualifies for the premiums E400C or E401C only if the case commences after hours
(see GP94).
[Commentary:
1.Each anaesthesiologist must indicate, as part of the medical record, his/her starting and
finishing times.
2.For continuous conduction anaesthesia, the replacement anaesthesiologist submits claims
using the applicable continuous conduction anaesthesia fee code.]
OBSTETRICS – CONTINUOUS CONDUCTION ANAESTHESIA
P014C, introduction of a catheter for labour analgesia, including the first dose of medication with or
without any combined spinal-epidural injection(s), has a value of 7 basic units.
P016C time units for maintenance of obstetrical epidural anaesthesia are calculated on the basis of 1
unit for each ½ hour of time to a maximum of 12 units.
E100C time units for attendance at delivery are calculated on the basis of 4 base units and 1 unit for
each ¼ hour
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP95 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 110 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ANAESTHESIOLOGISTS’ SERVICES
[Commentary:
1.As these services fall under the definition of general anaesthesia, the specific elements for
general anaesthesia apply to P014C, P016C and E100C.
2.For additional information on obstetrical anaesthesia services, see page K9 of the Schedule.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP96 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 111 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ANAESTHESIOLOGISTS’ SERVICES
EXTRA UNITS
Extra Units: An amount is payable for extra units in addition to basic units when an anaesthesiologist
administers an anaesthetic to:
Fee Number of extra
Criteria
code units
E021C premature newborn less than 37 weeks gestational 9 units
age
E014C newborn to 28 days 5 units
E009C infant from 29 days to 1 year of age 4 units
E019C infant or child from 1 year to 8 years of age inclusive 2 units
E007C adult aged from 70 to 79 years, inclusive 1 unit
E018C adult aged 80 years and older 3 units
E010C patient with body mass index (BMI) > 40 2 units
E011C patient in prone position during surgery 4 units
E024C patient in sitting position during surgery, greater than 4 units
60 degrees upright
E025C unanticipated massive transfusion – transfusion of at 10 units
least one blood volume of red blood cells
E012C patient who is known to have malignant hyperthermia 5 units
or there is a strong suspicion of susceptibility, and the
anaesthetic requires full malignant hyperthermia set
up and management
E022C ASA III - patient with severe systemic disease limiting 2 units
activity but not incapacitating
E017C ASA IV – patient with incapacitating systemic 10 units
disease that is a constant threat to life
E016C ASA V – moribund patient not expected to live 24 20 units
hours with or without operation
E020C ASA E - patient undergoing anaesthesia for 4 units
emergency surgery which commences within 24
hours of operating room booking, to E022C, E017C
or E016C
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP97 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 112 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ANAESTHESIOLOGISTS’ SERVICES
Note:
E025C is only eligible for payment for an unanticipated transfusion of blood during a surgical
procedure where:
1.greater than 70 ml/kg of red blood cells are transfused for a patient with a weight up to 50 kg;
or
2.10 or more units of red blood cells are transfused for a patient with a weight exceeding 50 kg.
[Commentary:
1.For E010, BMI is calculated by dividing the patient’s weight (in kilograms) by the square of
the patient’s height (in metres).
2.E025C is defined by the amount of blood transfused rather than the amount of blood loss.
The volume of blood transfused does not include blood collected from a cell saver,
hemodilution techniques or non-red blood cell components.]
Payment rules:
1. In the description of E022C, E016C, E017C and E020C, reference to ASA level for Physical
Status Classification means the level determined by the anaesthesiologist at the time of the pre-
operative anaesthesia assessment.
[Commentary:
The level determined above does not vary, for example, when complications arise during
surgery.]
2. E016C, E017C and E020C are not eligible for payment when anaesthesia is rendered to a brain
dead patient for organ donations.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP98 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 113 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ANAESTHESIOLOGISTS’ SERVICES
REPLACEMENT OF LISTED BASIC UNITS
Circumstances under which the listed basic units for a procedure are replaced with the following basic
units:
Fee Replace Number of Basic
Description
code units with
E650C when a pump (with or without an 28 units
oxygenator and with or without
hypothermia) is used in conjunction
with an anaesthetic
E645C off pump coronary artery bypass 40 units
grafting, to R742 or R743
E002C when hypothermia is used by the 25 units
anaesthesiologist in procedures not
specifically identified as requiring
hypothermia
E013C when anaesthetic management is 10 units
required for the emergency relief of
acute upper airway (above the
carina) obstruction (excluding
choanal atresia)
ANAESTHESIA FOR NERVE BLOCK PROCEDURES
When a physician renders an anaesthesia service in support of services performed by another
physician listed in Nerve Blocks for Acute Pain Management, Interventional Pain Injections or the
Peripheral/Other Nerve Block sections of the Schedule the anaesthesia service is only eligible for
payment as one of the following:
E030C Procedural sedation............................................ 4 basic units
Note:
Extra units listed on GP97 are not payable with E030C.
E031C General anaesthesia or deep sedation............... 4 basic units
Note:
Extra units listed on GP97 are not payable with E031C.
[Commentary:
Z432C is not eligible for payment for an anaesthesia service in support of a nerve block.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP99 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 114 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
ANAESTHESIOLOGISTS’ SERVICES
ANAESTHESIA FOR ocular SURGERY, EXAMINATION UNDER ANAESTHESIA, colonoscopy,
sigmoidoscopy and cystoscopy
For the purposes of E023C and E032C, anaesthesia means an anaesthesia service other than local
infiltration, topical anaesthesia or procedural sedation rendered in support of the listed procedures.
E023C and E032C replaces the listed basic units and time units for anaesthesia for these procedures.
Ocular Surgery, Cystoscopy, and Examination Under Anaesthesia
E023C Anaesthesia service for E137, E138, E139, E140, E141, E143,
E144, E145, E146, E186, E187, E149, Z432, Z606, or Z607
............................................. 6 basic units, plus time units.
Colonoscopy and Sigmoidoscopy
E032C Anaesthesia service for Z491, Z492, Z493, Z494, Z495, Z496,
Z497, Z498, Z499, Z555 or Z580
.............................................. 4 basic units, plus time units
[Commentary:
1.Deep sedation, general anaesthesia or regional anaesthesia, performed by an
anaesthesiologist, are examples of anaesthesia that may be rendered for E023C and E032C.
2.Anaesthesia extra units listed on GP97 are eligible for payment with E023C and E032C.
3.Local infiltration or topical anaesthesia used as an anaesthetic for any procedure is not
eligible for payment.]
Note:
For the purposes of anaesthesia services the following definitions apply:
1.Procedural Sedation is a drug-induced depression of consciousness during which patients
respond purposefully to verbal commands, either alone or accompanied by light tactile
stimulation. No interventions are required to maintain a patent airway, and spontaneous
ventilation is adequate. Cardiovascular function is usually maintained.
2.Deep Sedation is a drug-induced depression of consciousness during which patients cannot
be easily aroused but respond purposefully following repeated or painful stimulation. The
ability to independently maintain ventilatory function may be impaired. Patients may require
assistance in maintaining a patent airway, and spontaneous ventilation may be inadequate.
Cardiovascular function is usually maintained.
3.General Anaesthesia is a drug-induced loss of consciousness during which patients are not
arousable, even by painful stimulation. The ability to independently maintain ventilatory
function is often impaired. Patients often require assistance in maintaining a patent airway,
and positive pressure ventilation may be required because of depressed spontaneous
ventilation or drug-induced depression of neuromuscular function. Cardiovascular function
may be impaired.
ANAESTHESIA ADMINISTERED BY SAME PHYSICIAN PERFORMING A PROCEDURE
1. Except as described in paragraph 2, when a physician administers an anaesthetic, nerve block
and/or other medication prior to, during, immediately after or otherwise in conjunction with a
diagnostic, therapeutic or surgical procedure which the physician performs on the same patient,
the administration of the anaesthetic, nerve block and/or other medication is not eligible for
payment.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP100 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 115 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
ANAESTHESIOLOGISTS’ SERVICES
2. A major or minor peripheral nerve block, major plexus block, neuraxial injection (with or without
catheter) or intrapleural block (with or without catheter) for post-operative pain control (with a
duration of action more than 4 hours) is eligible for payment as G224 when rendered in
conjunction with a procedure which the physician performs on the same patient. With the
exception of a bilateral pudendal block (where only one service is eligible for payment), G224 is
eligible for payment once per region per side where bilateral procedures are performed.
[Commentary:
For additional information, refer to the Nerve Blocks for Acute Pain Management, Interventional
Pain Injections and the Peripheral/Other Nerve Block sections of the Schedule.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP101 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 116 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
SUPPORTIVE CARE/MONITORING BY SURGICAL ASSISTANT OR ANAESTHESIOLOGIST
SPECIFIC ELEMENTS
In addition to the common elements, supportive care or monitoring by the surgical assistant or
anaesthesiologist includes the following specific elements.
A. Being in constant attendance at a surgical procedure for the sole purpose of monitoring the
condition of the patient (including appropriate physical examination and inquiry) and being
immediately available to provide, and including the provision of, special supportive care to the
patient.
B. Discussion with, and providing advice and information, including prescribing therapy to the patient
or the patient’s representative, whether by telephone or otherwise, on matters related to:
1. the service; and
2. in circumstances in which it would be professionally appropriate that results can be reported
upon prior to any further patient visit, the results of related procedure(s) and/or assessment(s).
C. Providing premises, equipment, supplies, and personnel for any aspect(s) of the specific elements
of the service that is(are) performed at a place other than the place in which the attendance occurs.
While no occasion may arise for performing element B, when performed in connection with the other
elements it is included in the service.
CALCULATION OF FEE PAYABLE
The fee for this service is calculated in the same manner as for assistant and anaesthesia services.
Asst Anae
E003 Supportive care/Monitoring .................................................... 6 4
Payment rules:
1.For E003B, the assistants’ premiums apply as for assistants’ services.
2.Anaesthesia extra units listed on GP97 are not eligible for payment with E003C.
3.E003B is not eligible for payment for second assistant services.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP102 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 117 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
OTHER PREMIUMS
INTENSIVE OR CORONARY CARE UNIT PREMIUM
C101 For each patient seen on a visit to ICU or CCU (subject to the
exceptions set out below) ..................................................add 9.10
Payment rules:
C101 is not eligible for payment with Supportive Care or with Critical Care, Ventilatory Care,
Comprehensive Care, Acquired Brain Injury Management or Neonatal Intensive Care where
team fees are claimed.
[Commentary:
C101 is also payable alone when no other separate fee is payable for the service provided in
the ICU or CCU (e.g. post-operative care by surgeon).]
INTERNAL MEDICINE OFFICE ASSESSMENT PREMIUM
The Internal Medicine Office Assessment Premium is payable automatically to an eligible physician
subject to the definitions and rules described below.
Definitions:
"Qualifying services" means A133, A134, A131, and A138.
"Fiscal year" means April 1 - March 31st.
"Qualifying year" means the fiscal year preceding the date of determination of eligibility.
"Date of determination of eligibility" means the date upon which the General Manager determines that
the conditions for payment in (1) or (2) below, have been met.
Payment rules:
For the 12 month period following the date of determination of eligibility for the premium, the
amount payable to a physician shall be automatically increased by 12% for the qualifying
services in the following circumstances:
1.The physician is practicing solely as a general internist and has submitted all claims using the
specialty designation of Internal Medicine (13) in the qualifying year.
HOSPITALIST PREMIUM
The Hospitalist premium is payable automatically to an eligible physician subject to the definitions and
rules described below.
Definitions:
"Qualifying services" means E082, C122, C123, C124, C002, C007, C009, C132, C137, C139, C142,
C143, A/C933, and C882/C982.
"Fiscal year" means April 1 - March 31st.
"Qualifying year" means the fiscal year preceding the date of determination of eligibility, except in
cases where the physician has taken a pregnancy or parental leave during this period as confirmed by
an application to the Pregnancy and Parental Leave Benefits Program. In such cases, "Qualifying
year" means the most recent fiscal year not impacted by the leave.
"Date of determination of eligibility" means the date upon which the General Manager determines that
the conditions for payment in (1), (2), and (3) below, have been met.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP103 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 118 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
OTHER PREMIUMS
Payment rules:
For the 12 month period following the date of determination of eligibility for the premium, the
amount payable to a physician shall be automatically increased by 17% for all qualifying
services except for E082 in the following circumstances:
1.The physician has provided at least 1500 qualifying services in the qualifying year; and
2.The physician has provided at least one qualifying service per day on at least 110 days in the
qualifying year; and
3.The physician is a General and Family Practice (00) or an Internal Medicine (13) specialist.
AFTER HOURS PROCEDURE PREMIUMS
These premiums are payable only when the following criteria are met:
a. the service provided is one of the following:
Non-elective Surgical Procedures (including fractures or dislocations), Obstetrical Deliveries,
Clinical Procedures Associated with Diagnostic Radiological Examinations, Ground Ambulance
Transfer (K101), Air Ambulance Transfer (K111), Transport of Donor Organs (K102), Return
Trip (K112), or one of the following Major Invasive Procedures:
G060, G061, G062, G065, G066, G067, G068, G082, G083, G085, G090, G099, G117, G118,
G119, G125, G176, G177, G178, G179, G211, G224, G246, G248, G249, G260, G261, G262,
G263, G268, G269, G275, G277, G279, G280, G282, G287, G288, G290, G297, G298, G303,
G309, G322, G323, G324, G330, G331, G336, G347, G348, G349, G356, G376, G379, G380,
G509, J001 to J068, and X112 when required for intussusception
and;
b. the procedure is either (a) non-elective; or (b) an elective procedure which, because of an
intervening surgical emergency procedure(s) was delayed and commenced between:
Emergency Department Physician
E412 Evenings (17:00h – 24:00h) Monday to Friday or daytime and
evenings on Saturdays, Sundays, Holidays - increase the
procedural fee(s) by ............................................................ 20%
E413 Nights (00:00h – 07:00h) - increase the procedural fee(s) by . 40%
Physician – other than an Emergency Department Physician
E409 Evenings (17:00h – 24:00h) Monday to Friday or daytime and
evenings on Saturdays, Sundays, Holidays - increase the
procedural fee(s) by ........................................................... 50%
E410 Nights (00:00h – 07:00h) - increase the procedural fee(s) by . 75%
Payment rules:
1. E409/E410 is not payable for a procedure rendered by an Emergency Department Physician
2. E412/E413 is only payable for a procedure rendered by an Emergency Department Physician
who at the time the service was rendered is required to submit claims using “H” prefix
emergency services.
[Commentary:
See General Preamble GP50 for definitions and conditions for Emergency Department
Physician.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP104 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 119 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
OTHER PREMIUMS
AFTER HOURS SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS FOR DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES
All special visit premiums are subject to the maximums, limitations and conditions set out in the
"Special Visit Premium Table" applicable in the circumstances.
Subject to the provision set out below, these special visit premiums are eligible for payment for non-
elective services rendered by specialists in Diagnostic Radiology, Radiation Oncology or Nuclear
Medicine for an acute care hospital in-patient, out-patient or emergency department patient for
services listed in the following sections of the Schedule:
Nuclear Medicine, Radiation Oncology, Diagnostic Radiology, Clinical Procedures Associated with
Diagnostic Radiology Examinations, Magnetic Resonance Imaging and Diagnostic Ultrasound.
When a physician providing one or more of the foregoing non-elective services renders a special visit
(as defined under “Special Visit” page GP65) in the hospital during the time periods set out below for
the purpose of interpreting the results of a diagnostic service, performing a procedure, rendering a
diagnostic radiology or nuclear medicine consultation or to conclude that a procedure is not medically
indicated, a special visit premium is eligible for payment payable in addition to the appropriate
diagnostic radiology or nuclear medicine consultation, interpretation, or procedural fee, or by itself if
the decision is made not to perform the procedure.
Payment rules:
1.These special visit premiums are not eligible for payment for services rendered outside of a
hospital, for example via PACS.
2.Only one special visit person seen premium is eligible for payment per patient regardless of
the number of eligible services rendered during the same special visit for that patient.
3.These special visit premiums are not eligible for payment in addition to any other special visit
premium for the same special visit.
4.For the purpose of interpreting the results of a diagnostic service or performing a diagnostic
service, these special visit premiums are only eligible for payment if the request for the
interpretation relates to a patient’s condition requiring urgent interpretation that affects the
patient’s management.
[Commentary:
The specific requirements for special visits are found on pages GP65 to GP78.]
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUM TABLE - NON ELECTIVE DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES
Non-elective Diagnostic Services
Premium Evenings (17:00-
Sat., Sun. and Holidays
24:00) Monday Nights (00:00- 07:00)
(07:00- 24:00)
through Friday
Travel $36.40 $36.40 $36.40
Premium C102 C103 C104
(max. 2 per time period) (max. 6 per time period) (no max. per time period)
First person $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
seen C109 C108 C110
(max. 2 per time period) (max. 6 per time period) (no max. per time period)
Additional $60.00 $75.00 $100.00
person(s) C105 C106 C107
seen (max. 2 per time period) (max. 6 per time period) (no max. per time period)
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP105 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 120 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
OTHER PREMIUMS
[Commentary:
For the purposes of non-elective diagnostic services special visit premiums, first person seen
and additional person(s) seen mean the eligible diagnostic service(s) rendered for each
individual patient.]
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP106 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 121 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
March 4, 2024 (effective April 1, 2024)
OTHER PREMIUMS
AFTER HOURS SPECIAL VISIT PREMIUMS
The following premiums are payable for providing management and supervision of continuous
catheter infusions for analgesia for a hospital in-patient (G247) rendered during the time periods set
out below:
E402 Evenings (17:00h – 24:00h) Monday to Friday or daytime and
evenings on Saturday, Sunday or Holidays ......... add 40%
E403 Nights (00:00h – 07:00h) .......................................... add 50%
[Commentary:
For additional information, refer to the Nerve Blocks for Acute Pain Management section of the
Schedule.]
AFTER HOURS PREMIUMS FOR URGENT CT/MRI INTERPRETATION
Subject to the provisions set out below, these premiums are payable in addition to the CT or MRI
services listed in the Diagnostic Radiology and Magnetic Resonance Imaging sections of the
Schedule for interpreting a CT and/or MRI study on an urgent basis via a picture archiving and
communication system (PACS), using diagnostic workstations and monitors consistent with Digital
Imaging and Communications in Medicine (DICOM) standards. The physician must be physically
present in Ontario at a location other than the hospital where the patient receives the CT or MRI study
and provide the interpretation via PACS, including review of any relevant prior images available
through the PACS.
Evenings, Weekend/Holiday and Nights
E406 Evenings (17:00h - 24:00h) Monday to Friday........................ 60.00
E407 Saturdays, Sundays or Holidays daytime and evenings
(07:00h - 24:00h)................................................................ 75.00
E408 Nights (00:00h - 07:00h)......................................................... 100.00
Payment rules:
1.These premiums are only eligible for payment for an urgent CT or MRI interpretation for an
acute care hospital in-patient, emergency department or Hospital Urgent Care Clinic patient
and only if the following requirements are satisfied:
a.the referral for the interpretation relates to a patient’s condition that requires urgent
interpretation of a CT or MRI study for the urgent management of the patient;
b.the referral is from a physician or oral and maxillofacial surgeon who has privileges at the
hospital where the service is rendered;
c.the interpreting physician has radiology privileges at the hospital where the request for
the service originates; and
d.the interpretation is transmitted to the referring provider within three hours of the
completion of the CT/MRI study.
Note:
If the request for interpretation occurs prior to an eligible after hours period, but the
interpretation cannot be provided prior to that eligible after hours period due to factors beyond
the control of the interpreting physician, these premiums remain eligible for payment if the
payment rules are otherwise satisfied.
2.E406, E407 and E408 are limited to a maximum of one per patient, per physician, per day,
regardless of the number of CT and/or MRI images interpreted for that patient.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP107 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 122 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
OTHER PREMIUMS
3.After hours premiums in excess of the maximums listed in the After Hours Premium Table are
not eligible for payment.
Medical record requirements:
These premiums are only eligible for payment if the patient’s permanent medical record
contains the following information:
1.The time of the request and the time of the transmission of the interpretation; and
2.A description of any factors referred to in the note above.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP108 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 123 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
OTHER PREMIUMS
AFTER HOURS PREMIUM TABLE – Urgent CT/MRI Services
Urgent CT/MRI Services
Evenings Sat., Sun.
(17:00- 24:00) and
Nights (00:00-
Monday Holidays
07:00)
through (07:00-
Friday 24:00)
$60.00 $75.00 $100.00
E406 E407 E408
(max. 2 per (max. 6 per (no max. per
time period) time period) time period)
TRAUMA PREMIUM
Definition/Required elements of service:
The trauma premium is payable for each of the services and units described below when:
a. rendered either on the day of the trauma or within 24 hours of the trauma; and
b. for trauma patients age 16 or more who have an Injury Severity Score (ISS) of greater than
15, or for patients less than age 16 who have an Injury Severity Score of greater than 12.
E420 Trauma premium ...................................................... add 50%
Payment rules:
1. The premium is applicable to the following services and units;
a. services listed in the Consultation and Visits Section (Section A of the Schedule);
b. services listed in the Obstetrics Section (Section K of the Schedule);
c. services listed in the Surgical Procedures section (Section M through Z of the Schedule);
d. the following resuscitative services: G395, G391, G521, G522 and G523.
e. basic and time units provided by surgical assistants; or
f. basic and time units provided by anaesthesiologists.
2. The premium is payable only for the services for which the medical record lists the ISS score.
Claims submission instruction:
For claims payment purposes, the trauma premium and associated services must be submitted on the
same claim record.
[Commentary:
Other special visit and after hours premiums are payable with services eligible for the trauma
premium in accordance with the Schedule. However, the trauma premium is not applicable to
these services.]
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP109 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 124 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
EMERGENCY DEPARTMENT ALTERNATIVE FUNDING AGREEMENTS
When one or more physicians have contracted with the MOH to provide insured physician services
under an emergency department alternative funding agreement (ED AFA) in lieu of fee-for-service
payments under the Schedule, then no insured service encompassed by the contract relating to the
emergency department alternative funding agreement is payable, whether or not the physician who
renders the service is a party to the contract unless the physician is/are:
a. a second on-call physician who either does or does not participate in the ED AFA and who
can submit fee-for-service claims under the hospital’s ED AFA second on-call group number;
b. general practitioner experts (‘GP Experts’) who, in accordance with the ED AFA, are entitled
to submit fee-for-service claims under the hospital’s ED AFA GP Expert group number; or
c. the patient's general/family physician only for services payable as A100 - General/Family
Physician Emergency Department Assessment.
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP110 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)

--- PAGE 125 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
DIAGNOSTIC PROCEDURES ORDERED BY PERSONS OTHER THAN PHYSICIANS
Midwives and Aboriginal Midwives
Diagnostic ultrasound for normal, complicated or high-risk pregnancy (but not for the postpartum
period) rendered in an ICHSC or hospital is insured when referred by a midwife or aboriginal midwife.
Nurse Practitioners
Diagnostic procedures listed in the Diagnostic Radiology, Magnetic Resonance Imaging (MRI),
Diagnostic Ultrasound, Pulmonary Function Studies, and Diagnostic and Therapeutic Procedures
sections of the Schedule and rendered in an ICHSC, or a hospital, are insured when referred by a
nurse practitioner if the nurse practitioner is either authorized to order the test under the Nursing Act
or permitted to order the test in accordance with the regulations under the Regulated Health
Professions Act.
Diagnostic procedures listed in the Electrocardiography section of the Schedule rendered in any
clinical setting are insured when referred by a nurse practitioner if the nurse practitioner is either
authorized to order the test under the Nursing Act or permitted to order the test in accordance with the
regulations under the Regulated Health Professions Act.
Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeons
Diagnostic procedures listed in the Nuclear Medicine, Diagnostic Radiology, Magnetic Resonance
Imagine (MRI), Diagnostic Ultrasound, and Pulmonary Function Studies sections of the Schedule and
rendered in a hospital are insured when referred by an oral and maxillofacial surgeon if the oral and
maxillofacial surgeon is either authorized to order the test under the Dentistry Act or permitted to order
the test in accordance with the regulations under the Regulated Health Professions Act, and the test is
rendered:
a. in connection with a dental surgical procedure provided by an oral and maxillofacial surgeon
in a hospital and it is medically necessary for the patient to receive the dental surgical
procedure in a hospital; or
b. on the order of an oral and maxillofacial surgeon who has reasonable grounds to believe that
a dental surgical procedure, performed by an oral and maxillofacial surgeon, will be required
in connection with the test and that it will be medically necessary for the patient to receive
the dental surgical procedure in a hospital.
Februa ry 14, 2 025 (effec tive M ar ch 3, 2025) GP111 Amd 12 Draft 1

--- PAGE 126 ---
GENERAL PREAMBLE
NOT ALLOCATED
Amd 12 Draft 1 GP112 February 14 , 2 025 (e ffective M arch 3, 2025)